Acute myeloid leukaemia in adult patients: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-upy


INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) incidence is age dependent, rising markedly in patients aged 60 years. Ageing of the European population may therefore contribute to the re- ported increase in AML incidence in Europe from 3.48 in 1976 to 5.06 patients per 100 000 people in 2013.1 Across all age groups, the incidence of AML is higher in males than in females.2 The median age at diagnosis is w70 years.2
The 2016 World Health Organization (WHO) classification identifies distinct categories of AML (see supplementary Table S1, available at Annals of Oncology online).3 Notably, AML is primarily categorised by recurrent genetic abnormalities, with morphological classification reserved for patients not otherwise classifiable.
With advanced age, the relative incidence of AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities decreases,4 while the rela- tive incidence of other AML categories [such as AML with myelodysplasia-related changes (MRC-AML) or therapy- related AML (tAML)] increases with age, comprising about 19% and 7% of AML cases, respectively.5e7

Survival of AML patients in Europe
The prognosis and long-term survival rates of patients <65 years have incrementally improved with time, largely based

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland.
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
y Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: August 2002, last update January 2020. This publication supersedes the previously published ver- siondAnn Oncol. 2013;24(suppl 6):vi138evi143.
0923-7534/© 2020 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 

upon improved supportive care and increased utilisation of allogeneic haematopoietic cell transplantation (alloHCT). Despite this progress, age-standardised relative 5-year sur- vival for adult patients diagnosed between the years 2000 and 2007 was as low as 17% (16.6e17.7),8 mainly attrib- utable to the minimal progress attained in AML patients
>65 years.

DIAGNOSIS AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Patients suspected of a diagnosis of AML must undergo prompt cytogenetic and molecular investigations to inform risk stratification and, increasingly, treatment strategies. It is vital to urgently differentiate acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) from other forms of AML by cytomorphol- ogy (dysplastic promyelocytes, binucleated blasts, faggot cells), signs of hyperfibrinolysis and molecular evidence of PML-RARA fusion.
AML is defined based on morphological inspection revealing a myeloid blast count of 20% out of 500 bone marrow (BM) cells,9 although counting fewer cells is suffi- cient in patients with high blast count.10 Blast counts should include myeloblasts, monoblasts/promonocytes and mega- karyoblasts, but not abnormal monocytes. According to the latest WHO classification, all nucleated cells in the BM serve as a denominator, even in cases where the BM is enriched with erythroid precursors.3 Supplementary Table S2, avail- able at Annals of Oncology online, lists all mandatory clinical and laboratory tests that should be carried out at presentation.
Past medical history should be carefully reviewed to reveal signs of an antecedent BM disease and previous exposure to radiation, chemotherapy (ChT) or leukaemogenic toxins

such as benzene and organochlorine insecticides. Blood count results preceding AML diagnosis should be collected, but even if abnormal, are insufficient to make a definitive diagnosis of MRC-AML. A history of a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or a myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm or the presence of one of several MDS-related cytogenetic abnormalities, or   50% dysplastic cells in at least two cell lineages (except when combined with NPM1 or double CEBPA mutations), is required for the diagnosis of MRC-AML.3 Despite progress in immunophenotyping allow- ing recognition of dysplasia by aberrant ﬂow cytometry patterns, cytomorphology remains the gold standard for diagnosis of dysplasia and MDS.11
The authors recommend a BM aspirate for cytology and cytochemistry, including Sudan Black B, myeloperoxidase and esterase staining, immunophenotyping and a trephine biopsy for histology at diagnosis. Cytochemistry is especially helpful while cytogenetic and molecular results are awaited [V, B]. A BM biopsy is mandatory in patients with dry-tap. Interpretation of morphological changes may be chal- lenging. Presence of an AML-related recurrent genetic ab- normality [e.g. t(8:21)] overrules morphological uncertainties. Multiparameter ﬂow cytometry (MFC), using a minimum of six colours and following an established ﬂow cytometry protocol such as the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) criteria for immunophenotypic leukaemia classification,12 is required for the diagnosis of specific entities, such as mixed phenotype acute leukaemia (MPAL), AML not otherwise specified (NOS) with minimal differentiation, acute mega- karyoblastic leukaemia or blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN, positive for CD4, CD56, CD123 and TCL1).13,14 In general, genetic aberrations overrule immu- nophenotypic changes.
Cytogenetic classification should be based on the evalu- ation of at least 20 metaphases. An abnormal clone is re- ported only if at least 2/20 cells are identified as carrying the same karyotypic abnormality. Karyotype analysis may miss clinically significant cryptic aberrations [e.g. MLL/ KMT2A, inv(16), chromosome 3 aberrations], thus comple- mentary ﬂuorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis is recommended and should be considered mandatory when conventional cytogenetic analysis fails.
Molecular studies to detect the presence of mutations in the FLT3 gene [internal tandem duplication (ITD) or tyrosine kinase domain (TKD)] should be carried out immediately to allow timely initiation of an FLT3 inhibitor. Additional mo- lecular studies to measure the FLT3-ITD allelic ratio (AR), and detection of NPM1, PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, CBFB-MYH11 and double CEBPA mutations should be car- ried out at diagnosis given their prognostic significance. The presence of TP53, RUNX1 and ASXL1 mutations classifies patients to the adverse ELN risk group; testing is therefore advised. IDH1 and IDH2 should also be assessed for muta- tions to identify patients who may benefit from pharma- cological inhibitors when these become available in Europe. If available, next-generation sequencing (NGS) of a panel of genes commonly mutated in AML provides important additional prognostic and therapeutic information.
 
The new WHO diagnosis of myeloid neoplasms with germline predisposition is often overlooked in patients with newly diagnosed AML (see supplementary Table S1, avail- able at Annals of Oncology online). Genetic counselling is recommended in case of a positive cancer family history or if an inherited condition potentially associated with leukaemia has been diagnosed in any relative. There are also specific medical conditions that should draw physi- cians’ awareness regarding potential germline predisposi- tion (supplementary Table S3, available at Annals of Oncology online).15 All candidates for alloHCT and their siblings should undergo human leucocyte antigen (HLA) typing at diagnosis.
Sperm cryopreservation should be systematically pro- posed before starting ChT, especially in patients due to undergo alloHCT. In females, ovarian tissue cryopreserva- tion (OTC) may be carried out before haematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) if patients are in complete remission (CR).16 The main concern about the safety of autologous transplantation of ovarian fragments is possible contami- nation with leukaemic cells that may lead to AML recur- rence.16 Fertility preservation is further discussed in ‘Follow-up, long-term implications and survivorship’ section in supplementary Material, available at Annals of Oncology online.


CLASSIFICATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT
The initial assessment of newly diagnosed AML patients should focus on patient fitness for standard induction and consolidation ChT. Pre-existing heart, kidney, lung or liver disease, mental illness, an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance score 3 and age 75 years are the strongest predictors for nonrelapse induction-related mortality and should be considered to determine ineligi- bility to intensive induction and consolidation ChT [V, B].17 The risk of early death of older AML patients upon induction ChT can be calculated using seven clinical parameters: body temperature, age, de novo versus secondary leukaemia, haemoglobin level, platelet count, fibrinogen level and serum concentration of lactate dehydrogenase.18 The HCT- specific comorbidity index (HCT-CI) score predicts treatment-related mortality in patients treated with induc- tion ChT, as well as transplant outcome.19,20 The final de- cision concerning the role of intensive ChT is taken after careful consultation between an experienced clinician and the patient. The presence of extramedullary involvement should be evaluated clinically, although its prognostic value is debatable.21 Extramedullary AML involvement has been found in 17% of patients when using positron emission tomography (PET).22 In case of any neurological signs or symptoms, diagnostic lumbar puncture should be carried out when blasts are reduced in peripheral blood, and cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [or computed tomog- raphy (CT) if MRI is unavailable] should be conducted. In APL patients, lumbar puncture should be delayed until recovery of bleeding diathesis.
In patients with hypoproliferative disease or those who can be safely treated with hydroxycarbamide cytoreduction, it may be feasible to await cytogenetic and molecular ge- netic results before commencing treatment, if these results are likely to inﬂuence the choice of therapeutic modalities. Genetic classification of AML is essential to guide clinical decisions and predict prognosis. The 2017 ELN recommen- dations identify three risk groups, based on karyotype and mutational analysis (ELN favourable, intermediate and adverse risk, see supplementary Table S4, available at Annals of Oncology online).12 The favourable-risk AML group comprises all patients in whom a relapse risk is predicted to be low if treated with induction and consoli- dation ChT alone. This group includes patients with mutated
NPM1 (NPM1mut) without FLT3-ITD or with FLT3-ITD pre- senting with AR <0.5, t(8;21)(q22;q22.1)/RUNX1-RUNX1T1, inv(16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22)/CBFB-MYH11, or
presenting with double-mutant CEBPA. However, a large retrospective analysis showed that 3.6% of NPM1mut/FLT3- ITDlow patients have adverse cytogenetic aberrations, which confer an equally poor prognosis as adverse cytogenetics in NPM1wildtype patients.23
The intermediate-risk AML group comprises patients with molecular or cytogenetic abnormalities not classified as favourable or adverse, and includes patients with NPM1mut and a high AR of FLT3-ITD.
The adverse-risk AML group includes patients with complex cytogenetics and other poor-risk genetic aberra- tions.12 All patients failing to achieve CR after 2 induction cycles should also be considered as adverse-risk patients, regardless of genetics/cytogenetics.24 Accurate risk stratifi- cation plays a critical role in guiding selection of the optimal postremission approach and of indications for alloHCT in first CR (CR1).25 A comprehensive risk classification inte- grating clinical, genetic and treatment data is available as an online tool that simulates the individual patient’s risk and predicts outcome with and without alloHCT (https://cancer. sanger.ac.uk/aml-multistage/).26

RESPONSE ASSESSMENT
Deﬁning response and treatment failure
The ELN has defined response categories to induction ChT.12 In addition to conventional CR, CR with incomplete hae- matological recovery (CRi) and CR without measurable residual disease (CRMRDe) were proposed (supplementary Table S5, available at Annals of Oncology online). ELN MRD recommendations recently proposed CR with molec- ular persistence at low copy numbers (CRMRDlow) to account for NPM1 and core binding factor leukaemia patients with positive MRD at low copy numbers (<100e200 copies/104
ABL copies corresponding to <1%e2% of target to refer-
ence gene or variant allele burden), who have completed
their treatment and have a low risk of relapse despite MRD positivity. The authors recommend handling these patients the same way as patients with complete molecular remis- sion. In addition, CR with partial haematological recovery (CRh) is proposed by other groups, to be used in the context
 
of clinical studies [<5% blasts in the BM, without evidence of extramedullary disease, platelets 50   109/l and ab- solute neutrophil count (ANC) 0.5 109/l]. The term CRp, also used in clinical studies, indicates a CR with platelets
<100    109/l and with ANC recovery    1.0    109/l, but is now covered by CRi. Morphological leukaemia-free state (MLFS) consists of <5% BM blasts, absence of blasts with Auer rods, no extramedullary disease and a lack of hae- matological recovery of both neutrophils and platelets where the BM may not be merely aplastic and at least 200 cells should be counted or cellularity at trephine biopsy should be at least 10%. By comparison, CRi requires recovery of at least one lineage (either ANC 1.0 109/l or platelets 100 109/l). BM cellularity <10% should be defined as BM aplasia in patients without count recovery, and response assessment repeated after 2e4 weeks. It is unclear if prognosis differs between patients reaching CRi or MLFS. In clinical practice, it is recommended to use CRMRD—, CR, CRi and MLFS.
The authors introduce an operational definition of refractoriness for patients not achieving CR/CRi/MLFS after the first induction cycle: blast persistence after induction 1 defined by 5% blasts in BM. Consistent with ELN 2017 recommendations, patients are considered primary re- fractory to induction ChT if they have    5% blasts in BM after the second induction cycle. It was shown that patients with >15% BM blasts or <50% reduction of BM blasts after the first induction cycle constitute a group with an equally
poor prognosis as patients with primary refractory disease and who may benefit from direct alloHCT.24
Relapse is defined by BM blasts	5% in patients who have been in CR previously, or reappearance of blasts in the blood or development of extramedullary AML.12,24 Molec- ular relapse is defined by an increase of the MRD level of 1 log10 between two positive samples in a patient who
previously tested negative.

Measurable residual disease
Morphological enumeration of the blast percentage should be refined by immunophenotypic or molecular MRD assessment in patients with <10% blasts.27 ELN recom- mendations on MRD assessment in AML specify its clinical use and technical requirements.28 It is recommended to assess MRD by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for patients positive for NPM1mut, RUNX1- RUNX1T1, CBFB-MYH11 or PML-RARA fusion genes; w40% of all AML patients. In the remaining patients, MRD should
be assessed by MFC, which relies on antigens aberrantly expressed by leukaemic cells that can be found in >90% of AML patients. Many clinical studies have shown the strong prognostic impact of MRD, as measured by MFC, with levels 0.1% defined as positive.29e31 Laboratories should report results of MRD studies according to recently published
guidelines.28
More than 90% of AML patients harbour a molecular marker that could potentially be used for MRD assessment by molecular methods. NGS enables simultaneous testing
 

 
of multiple genes in a single assay,32 and sensitivity ap- proaches 10e4 with recent protocols.33 Residual positivity for nonclonal haematopoiesis-related gene mutations (thus excluding DNMT3A, TET2 and ASXL1) after 2 cycles of induction ChT and before alloHCT predicted AML relapse in a recent study, which also showed that NGS-MRD and MFC are complementary techniques.32 However, NGS-MRD needs thorough standardisation and validation before recommendation for clinical use.
In APL patients, MRD assessment is recommended at the end of consolidation treatment, before starting mainte- nance. In non-high-risk APL patients treated with arsenic trioxide (ATO) and all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA), all patients were MRD negative at the end of consolidation.34 If MRD is negative in these patients, no further MRD assessment is recommended in view of the very low relapse risk.28 In high-risk APL patients treated with ChT and ATRA, a variable proportion of 1%e5% of patients were MRD positive at the end of consolidation.35 Continuous MRD monitoring is therefore recommended in high-risk APL patients to predict impending haematological relapse and thereby prevent bleeding complications and to allow administration of pre- emptive therapy at the time of molecular relapse, prior to the occurrence of haematological relapse.

When to assess response?
The authors recommend performing up to two BM as- sessments during the first cycle of standard induction ChT, the first between day 14 and day 21 as early response assessment to guide further treatment in case of insuffi- cient response, and the second after recovery of BM to document CR. BM aspirates are usually sufficient, but trephine biopsy is recommended if smears are not evalu- able. If a first response assessment gives an uncertain result, it is advisable to repeat BM aspirations until a clearer picture is obtained and the attainment of morphological CR can be more reliably assessed, at least when the non- attainment of CR would have therapeutic consequences. If a second induction cycle is applied, BM should be assessed after haematological recovery or between days 28 and 35 if haematological recovery is still lacking.
Morphological assessment of BM is recommended before each consolidation cycle and before alloHCT. After the end of intensive induction and consolidation treatment, BM morphology may be repeated every 3 months for 24 months. 3-monthly differential blood counts are recom- mended for a total of 5 years after the end of treatment.
Assessment of MRD is recommended at diagnosis to establish the aberrant marker profile, after 2 cycles of ChT and after the end of treatment. In addition, molecular MRD may be assessed every 3 months after the end of treatment from BM or every 4e6 weeks from peripheral blood for 24 months in patients with a molecular marker. Flow cyto- metric MRD should be assessed from BM, while molecular MRD should be assessed from both blood and BM.28
In patients treated nonintensively, response should be assessed at the very least after 4 cycles to diagnose
 
refractory disease, and every 3 months thereafter if patients have no or incomplete recovery of at least one of the three blood lineages to identify refractory disease.

TREATMENT AND OUTCOME OF NEWLY DIAGNOSED AML
When a diagnosis of AML is made, a number of immediate decisions must be made. In patients in whom APL is sus- pected, immediate treatment with ATRA should be initi- ated, until confirmatory molecular and/or cytogenetic results are available [V, A]. In patients with non-APL AML with a white blood cell (WBC) count >100 109/l and signs of leukostasis, the requirement for cytoreduction should be considered. This is achieved with 50e60 mg/kg hydroxycarbamide per day, or, if a patient cannot swallow, either with intravenous (i.v.) or subcutaneous cytarabine, or
with i.v. daunorubicin. Leukapheresis for hyperleukocytosis should be avoided in APL patients because it may exacer- bate coagulopathy [V, B]. In non-APL AML patients, the efficacy of leukapheresis to reduce early mortality was investigated in a meta-analysis and a propensity-matched study.36 Early mortality was not reduced by leukapheresis which can thus not be generally recommended [II, C]. Nevertheless, if leukapheresis is applied, it should be accompanied by hydroxycarbamide, cytarabine or dauno- rubicin.37 If central nervous system (CNS) involvement is diagnosed, the patient should be treated with intrathecal cytarabine twice weekly, with two injections beyond blast clearance from the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), except in APL patients in whom intrathecal treatment should be delayed until recovery of coagulopathy. Supportive care is essential for the patient and should include prophylaxis and man- agement of tumour lysis syndrome, infection, hyper- fibrinolysis, bleeding and eventual thrombosis. There are scant data to support the use of a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist in female AML patients for pre- vention of loss of fertility, but it can be used to avoid menorrhagia.38
Based on eligibility criteria and patient preference, all AML patients must be assigned to either standard induction and consolidation ChT or nonintensive treatment (see ‘Classification and risk assessment’ section). Patients should be encouraged to participate in clinical trials whenever possible.

First-line treatment of AML patients eligible for standard induction and consolidation ChT
Recommendations for induction ChT. The recommended first-line treatment according to patient subgroups is shown in Figures 1 and 2. If a patient fulfils criteria for two or more novel drug combinations, the authors recommend following the algorithm in Figure 1, which prioritises the recom- mended treatments. Schedules and doses are detailed in supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology online. For CBF-AML, the authors recommend 7 days of cytarabine, 3 days of daunorubicin (7 3) and 1e3 days of gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) in induction 1: 7      3     GO [II, A]. GO is approved for CD33-positive AML patients
(defined by 30% blasts expressing CD33 in the pivotal trial) in combination with 7     3 induction ChT in induction 1, but not in induction 2.40,41 Our recommendation is based primarily on the meta-analysis of five studies with GO, in which patients with CBF-AML (RUNX1-RUNX1T1- or CBFB- MYH11-positive AML) benefit most from the addition of GO [GO improved 6-year overall survival (OS) by 20.7% to an OS of 75.5% in this meta-analysis].42 GO is approved as a fractionated dose of 3 mg/m2 on days 1, 4 and 7 based on the ALFA-0701 trial.40 However, the ALFA-0701 trial contributed only 3.6% of the patients with favourable-risk cytogenetics to the meta-analysis (9/251 patients).40,42 The majority of patients with favourable-risk cytogenetics in the meta-analysis received only one dose of 3 mg/m2 GO during induction cycle 1 (170/251 patients, 67.7%).42 Thus, the optimal dose for GO remains to be determined. Because of the risk of hepatic sinusoidal obstruction syndrome, a 2- month period was recommended in the ALFA-0701 trial between the last dose of GO and alloHCT conditioning, but it is recommended not to delay transplantation if GO was administered within 8 weeks before alloHCT.
 
If tAML or MRC-AML is diagnosed in patients aged 60 years, treatment with liposomal daunorubicin and cytarabine (CPX-351) is recommended [I, A]. CPX-351 is approved for AML patients 18 years of age with tAML or MRC-AML and improved 2-year OS by 18.8% to 31.1% in patients aged 60 years.43 CPX-351 is approved in Europe independent of age, although randomised or prospective data in younger patients have not been published. No benefit of CPX-351 over 7 3 was found in the subgroup of patients who had been previously treated with hypo- methylating agents (HMAs) for MDS, who should preferably be treated in clinical trials.43 CPX-351 is also recommended for FLT3-ITD- or FLT3-TKD-positive tAML or MRC-AML, as CPX-351 showed good efficacy in this subgroup [median OS (mOS) 10.25 versus 4.6 months], while very few MRC-AML and no tAML patients were treated in the RATIFY trial evaluating the FLT3 inhibitor midostaurin.
For the remaining patients, 7 3 midostaurin is rec- ommended if they are FLT3-ITD or FLT3-TKD positive [I, A]. Midostaurin is approved for patients with a FLT3-ITD or FLT3-TKD mutation (defined by an AR ≥0.05) in
combination with 7	3 induction ChT. The addition of midostaurin improved OS by 7.1% after 4 years to 51.4%.44 If none of the previous markers is positive, 7	3 in- duction ChT is generally recommended [II, A]. The addition of GO to 7	3 may also be considered in younger CD33- positive patients with non-CBF-AML with ELN favourable or intermediate risk [II, C]. In a meta-analysis, GO improved 6-year OS by 5.7% in patients with intermediate-risk cyto- genetics to 39.6%. However, GO had no effect on 6-year OS in patients with adverse-risk cytogenetics (6-year OS 8.9%) and is not recommended in these patients [II, E].42 A large randomised study failed to show an event-free survival (EFS) benefit of additional GO in NPM1mut AML patients
treated with induction ChT and ATRA.45
In the remaining patients with ELN adverse risk, 7     3 ChT is recommended [II, A] with the option to add cla- dribine or ﬂudarabine to induction ChT in patients up to 60 years (though cladribine and ﬂudarabine are not approved for this indication) [II, C].46 Upfront treatment with 2 cycles of ﬂudarabine, cytarabine, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor and idarubicin (FLAG-Ida) ChT improved relapse-free survival (RFS), but not OS in younger AML patients and may be considered in younger high-risk patients [I, C].39 There are limited data on the treatment of BCR-ABL1-positive AML. Tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKI)-naive patients should be treated with a second-line TKI with or without induction ChT [II, A].47 Nonresponding patients should be treated with another TKI.
After the first induction cycle, response should be assessed between day 14 and day 21. Patients with 5% blasts in BM after induction 1 (blast persistence) should receive a second induction cycle, which may consist of the identical ChT as induction 1 or of a regimen containing intermediate-dose cytarabine (IDAC), for example, FLAG- Ida [III, C]. As soon as patients achieve CR/CRi after 1 or 2 induction cycles, they should proceed to consolidation treatment [II, B].48 Patients not achieving CR/CRi after 2 cycles of induction ChT are defined as primary refractory and their treatment options are discussed later. The optimal ChT backbone for induction therapy consisting of cytarabine and an anthracycline is further discussed in supplementary Material, available at Annals of Oncology online.
Consolidation treatment with ChT or autologous HCT. Patients in CR after induction ChT should undergo consoli- dation treatment with either ChT, autologous HCT (autoHCT) or alloHCT [I, A] (Figure 1). There are insufficient data to give a recommendation on the number of ChT cy- cles before auto/alloHCT, but the timing of alloHCT is usually determined by donor availability. Patients in CR with ELN favourable-risk AML should be consolidated with ChT [I, A], while autoHCT is an alternative and results in better RFS, but not OS, than ChT (e.g. in patients with CBF-AML or double-mutant CEBPA AML) [II, B].49,50 If CBF-AML patients are consolidated with ChT, 3 cycles with IDAC are recom- mended [II, B]. In CBF-AML patients, the addition of 3 mg/ m2 GO given on day 1 in consolidation 1 and 2 is optional
 
[II, C], as it remains unclear whether GO in consolidation contributes to the overall benefit (Figure 1).51
Patients in CR with ELN intermediate- or adverse-risk AML should undergo alloHCT, if feasible [II, A].52,53 If no suitable donor is available or if alloHCT is contraindicated, these patients should undergo consolidation ChT or autoHCT.49,54 ELN intermediate-risk patients, 40e60 years old and in CR1, had comparable OS with autoHCT and alloHCT consolidation54 and better OS with autoHCT compared with ChT.55 A retrospective study reported better RFS and OS in patients receiving busulfan/melphalan con- ditioning before autoHCT compared with busulfan/cyclo- phosphamide conditioning.56
Patients treated with CPX-351 during induction may receive up to 2 consolidation cycles with CPX-351 with a reduced dose and 2 instead of 3 days of application compared with induction ChT.43 In FLT3-mutated patients, midostaurin is combined with consolidation ChT and up to 3 consolidation cycles should be applied in patients not un- dergoing alloHCT.44 If non-CBF-AML patients are treated with GO during induction, GO is optional in consolidation 1 and 2 in combination with cytarabine (Figure 1 and supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology online).40
At least 2 consolidation cycles are recommended in CR patients not undergoing alloHCT with cytarabine 1.5 g/m2 every 12 hours on days 1e3 in patients <60e65 years of age, and a dose reduction to 1 g/m2 in patients aged 60e65 years, taking biologic age into consideration
[II, A].57
If alloHCT is not feasible in younger patients with adverse-risk cytogenetics, consolidation with amsacrine, cytarabine, etoposide/mitoxantrone, cytarabine (MACE/ MidAC) may be considered (OS 39% versus 0% after a median follow-up of 5.6 years) [II, B].39
Extramedullary manifestations of AML/myeloid sarcoma may present at diagnosis and may be the sole manifestation of AML. If myeloid sarcoma is the only manifestation, induction ChT followed by alloHCT is recommended (Figure 1). Individual reports show that local RT can induce long-term remission in patients with persisting or relapsing extramedullary AML sites.58 While RT can effectively induce local control, its effect on long-term outcome is poorly investigated.59
Consolidation treatment with alloHCT. AML remains the most frequent indication for alloHCT. Key considerations before proceeding to alloHCT for consolidation in first or second CR include donor availability and patient fitness.
Eligibility criteria. In CR1, alloHCT is indicated in patients with intermediate or adverse risk AML and age 75 years according to recommendations of ELN 2017,12 European Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT)60 and American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation (ASBMT)61 [II, A]. BCR-ABL-positive patients should undergo alloHCT as soon as they achieve remission. In older patients, comorbidities must be carefully evaluated. In this regard, the HCT-CI predicts nonrelapse mortality (NRM) and OS and
 

 
helps in the selection of patients.19 Likewise, the combi- nation of HCT-CI with the EBMT score translates into NRM prediction for patients undergoing reduced-intensity con- ditioning (RIC) alloHCT in CR1.62
Donor selection. Nowadays, almost all patients will have a donor despite the decreasing number of siblings, as cord blood and haploidentical transplantation have become feasible.63 Retrospective data comparing the different donor sources suggest similar leukaemia-free survival and OS probabilities in haploidentical transplant recipients who have received post-transplant cyclophosphamide, although results differ markedly according to the regimen used.64,65 As patients need to be transplanted in due time, currently, the first priority is to select an HLA-identical donor (sibling or unrelated donor if the search time is <3
months from diagnosis, 10/10 or 9/10 HLA match required),
with second and third priority being an umbilical cord blood donor or haploidentical donor, depending on centre experience and patient’s age.66 In haploidentical transplants of AML patients aged 40 years, young donors are preferred, while in patients <40 years of age, neither the age of the donor nor the kinship has an impact on the outcome.67
Conditioning regimens. The aim of conditioning is to eradicate the disease and enable a graft-versus-leukaemia (GvL) effect with minimal NRM and low risk of relapse. Currently used myeloablative conditioning (MAC) regimens, with or without total body irradiation (TBI), are quite similar in dosing and schedules but are associated with consider- able NRM and are therefore usually restricted to patients
55 years of age, if no comorbidities are present.68 In younger fit patients, the myeloablative ﬂudarabine/ busulfan (Flu/Bu4) regimen is associated with less toxicity than busulfan/cyclophosphamide (Bu/Cy).69 Cy/TBI mye- loablative regimens have been extensively used as a con- ditioning regimen in high-risk AML. However, there are no convincing data to demonstrate their superiority to a Bu/Cy or Flu/Bu4 regimen, both of which are widely utilised.70 A TBI-based myeloablative regimen should be considered in rare patients with evidence of CNS disease at presenta- tion or a myeloid sarcoma. In contrast, RIC regimens use heterogeneous doses and schedules and rely more on the GvL effect. Despite large meta-analyses, it is currently not possible to define the optimal conditioning regimen for AML. In general, MAC is recommended for patients aged 55 years with HCT-CI	2 [I, A] and RIC for all other pa- tients [II, B].71 Graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) prophylaxis is a critical part of alloHCT and the recommendations for a standardised prophylaxis and treatment of GvHD by the
EBMT-ELN working group on GvHD should be followed.72
Maintenance treatment after intensive ChT or alloHCT. Maintenance treatment is approved only for midostaurin in patients who are in CR after induction and consolidation ChT (but not after alloHCT). Exploratory analysis of the RATIFY trial failed to clarify whether midostaurin mainte- nance contributes to the OS benefit of midostaurin73; based
 
on expert opinion, this treatment after ChT consolidation is not recommended [IV, D]. Importantly, midostaurin main- tenance should not replace alloHCT in transplant candi- dates. Maintenance treatment with subcutaneous azacitidine in older AML patients who obtained CR after induction and consolidation treatment improved disease- free survival but not OS in a randomised study.74 Recently, maintenance treatment with oral azacitidine (CC-486) showed improved survival in patients 55 years of age who obtained CR after intensive ChT, but is currently not approved.75
The use of maintenance and pre-emptive treatment af- ter alloHCT remains controversial. Therapeutic options include TKIs for FLT3-ITD-mutated AML, HMAs or donor lymphocyte infusions (DLIs). In a small randomised trial, maintenance with sorafenib after alloHCT in FLT3mut pa- tients improved 2-year RFS in patients who were not pretreated with an FLT3 inhibitor.76 The results of ongoing larger randomised trials are required before maintenance sorafenib or midostaurin can be recommended after alloHCT in patients with FLT3-ITD-positive AML.77
A phase I/II dose-finding study of oral azacitidine (CC-486) maintenance treatment after alloHCT in patients with AML or MDS showed encouraging results with a 1-year relapse/ progression rate of 21%.78 It is unclear whether prophylactic HMA treatment after alloHCT is beneficial to prevent relapse, as it may increase toxicity without therapeutic benefit in patients who can be cured with alloHCT alone. Pre-emptive treatment when mixed chimerism (MC) or MRD appears could prevent or delay relapse in patients with AML and MDS.79 Currently, maintenance with HMAs cannot be recommended outside of clinical trials [V, D]. In BCR-ABL-positive patients, TKI maintenance after alloHCT is recommended [V, B].
DLI, as pre-emptive treatment in patients with MRD or MC, or as prophylactic treatment before relapse or progression, is increasingly used in AML after alloHCT.80 This is due to the poor efficacy of therapeutic DLIs when overt relapse occurs and increased use of RIC allografts. So far, there is no clear recommendation for the use of DLIs and important questions remain, such as time of administration, dose and use of DLIs as prophylactic or pre-emptive treatment.

First-line treatment of AML patients not eligible for standard induction and consolidation ChT
The HMAs azacitidine and decitabine are currently the first choice in newly diagnosed unfit AML patients [II, B] [(Figure 2); see supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology online, for dosing].81,82 While venetoclax in combination with azacitidine, decitabine or low-dose cytar- abine (LDAC) is approved in the United States and Israel,83 and glasdegib in combination with LDAC is approved in the United States for newly diagnosed AML patients aged 75 years or those with comorbidities that preclude use of intensive induction ChT,84 their approval is pending in most European countries. Although venetoclax in combination with an HMA or LDAC is considered to be superior to
currently available first-line treatments for AML patients ineligible for standard induction ChT based on promising preliminary data, results of ongoing randomised trials are awaited before its use can be recommended with confidence [III, A].
A prospective randomised study comparing 5- and 10-day decitabine treatment in newly diagnosed AML patients found almost identical CR and early mortality rates, EFS and OS between the two arms, which also extended to the subgroup of TP53mut patients.85 Thus, if decitabine is cho- sen, it is recommended to follow the 5-day schedule [II, B]. No predictive markers are known to recommend one HMA over the other. HMA treatment is usually continued until disease progression or intolerance but may be terminated after at least 4 consecutive cycles if the patient has not responded or derived clinical benefit. Given the moderate effects of HMAs, LDAC remains an alternative to HMAs in the first-line treatment of AML patients who are ineligible for standard induction and consolidation ChT, except in patients with adverse-risk cytogenetics, where LDAC has very poor activity [II, B]. First-line treatment with LDAC results in mOS of w5 months.86 A practical benefit of LDAC is its longer stability after being dissolved, allowing administration at home unlike azacitidine and decitabine. Patients with MDS progressing to AML during treatment with azacitidine constitute a significant therapeutic chal- lenge. Current evidence shows that 21%e43% AML patients pretreated with HMAs and who received HMA and ven- etoclax achieved a response.87,88 MDS patients progressing to AML under HMA treatment may be similarly sensitised to HMA by the addition of venetoclax [III, B]; LDAC or best supportive care with either 6-mercaptopurine or low-dose melphalan or hydroxycarbamide are remaining options, if no clinical trial is available [III, C].
Patients should be treated for at least 4 cycles and, in
case of clinical benefit, should continue until progression or intolerance. Patients responding to initial treatment should be re-evaluated regarding their ability to undergo alloHCT using RIC, which may cure a proportion of these patients.

TREATMENT OF PRIMARY REFRACTORY AND RELAPSED AML
Roughly 10%e20% of younger and 50% of older AML pa- tients do not achieve CR after at least two courses of intensive induction therapy, and 50%e70% of patients who obtain CR will relapse.12 The prognosis of primary refractory and relapsed AML patients remains poor and treatment is challenging. A primary consideration in the therapeutic approach of refractory or relapsed AML patients should be their suitability for intensive ChT and alloHCT. Mutation analysis for FLT3 should be repeated in relapsed patients, as gilteritinib has been approved in Europe and the United States in the relapse setting of FLT3-ITD- and FLT3-TKD- mutated patients.89 Mutation analysis for IDH1/2 will become relevant once the IDH1/2mut inhibitors ivosidenib/ enasidenib become available in Europe.
 
Primary refractory and relapsed AML patients eligible for standard ChT and alloHCT
The outcome of patients with primary refractory AML is dismal, with no realistic prospect of long-term survival after salvage ChT90; thus, alloHCT is the most effective treatment option providing long-term survival in 20%e30% of patients [III, B] (Figure 3).91 Outcomes for patients with primary refractory AML may be better with a sequential transplant conditioning regimen, in which a combination of cytar- abine/amsacrine ChT is followed by a ﬂudarabine-based RIC regimen (FLAMSA-RIC) [III, C].92 If a family or unrelated donor is not immediately available, either a haploidentical or cord blood donor alloHCT should be offered promptly. For fit patients with relapsed AML, the recommended treatment is salvage ChT followed by alloHCT [III, B] (Figure 3). Breems et al. developed a simplified prognostic score to predict the efficacy of salvage ChT in relapsed AML patients based on the length of the relapse-free interval after CR1, cytogenetics at diagnosis, age at relapse and previous alloHCT.93 Many salvage regimens have been studied in an effort to improve CR rates in patients with relapsed AML. Commonly used salvage regimens are sum- marised in supplementary Table S7, available at Annals of Oncology online.94 Because of the limited long-term effects, enrolment in clinical trials is strongly recommended. The authors recommend a salvage protocol based on high- or intermediate-dose cytarabine in combination with an anthracycline and, optionally, a purine analogue (e.g. FLAG- Ida) [II, B]. Patients with late relapse ( 12 months after the end of first-line treatment) may also benefit from retreat- ment with the previously successful induction regimen.
AlloHCT should be considered for all fit, eligible patients
who entered second CR [III, B], as it represents the only chance for long-term survival.95,96 A second alloHCT or DLI may induce long-term survival in patients with relapse after the first alloHCT, particularly for those relapsing later than 5 months [IV, C].97 A Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research (CIBMTR) retrospective study found survival probabilities at 3 years to be 4%, 12%, 26% and 38% for patients relapsing within 6 months, 6e24 months, 2e3 years or >3 years after alloHCT.98 Intensive ChT can induce a CR in a proportion of patients relapsing
after an alloHCT, but is associated with considerable toxicity. HMAs, notably azacytidine, represent an important and less toxic alternative, particularly in patients relapsing
>6 months after alloHCT, as demonstrated in a recent large EBMT study.99 Relapse of FLT3-mutated AML after alloHCT
has a poor prognosis, but encouraging results have been reported using both gilteritinib and quizartinib as mono- therapy.89,100 Patients achieving a CR can proceed to a second alloHCT or DLI with potentially curative intent.

Primary refractory and relapsed AML patients not eligible for standard ChT
The therapeutic options in unfit AML patients aim at con- trolling disease progression and minimising treatment-related mortality (TRM). In FLT3-mutated patients, the authors
recommend treatment with gilteritinib, which showed a favourable response rate and improved OS compared with ChT (mOS 9.3 versus 5.6 months) [I, A].89 Quizartinib also showed a survival benefit in relapsed/refractory FLT3-ITD- mutated patients but was not approved in Europe (mOS 6.2 versus 4.7 months).100 If the patient is considered ineligible, azacitidine or decitabine should be applied if LDAC was given in first line, and LDAC may be applied in favourable- and intermediate-risk patients if an HMA was given initially [IV, B] (Figure 3). In a cohort of 655 relapsed/refractory AML patients treated with azacitidine or decitabine, the CR/CRi rate was found to be 16.3% with mOS of 6.7 months, with no differ- ences observed between agents.101 If available, venetoclax in combination with HMA or LDAC is a promising second-line treatment with overall response rates of 21%e43%.87,88 In IDH1/IDH2mut patients, inhibitors ivosidenib102 and enaside- nib,103 respectively, show considerable activity as single agents in relapsed/refractory patients, and will expand the treatment options once they become available. Differenti- ation syndrome occurs in up to 20% of patients treated with IDH-inhibitor monotherapy or when combined with HMAs and requires close monitoring and immediate initia- tion of dexamethasone treatment when suspected.104 Eligibility for RIC alloHCT should be re-evaluated for pa- tients who achieved CR. GO is not approved in Europe for refractory and relapsed AML patients and currently is not recommended as a salvage treatment. Older patients with hypocellular marrow may benefit from oral low-dose melphalan [V, C].105 Best supportive care with cytoreduc- tive treatment (hydroxycarbamide, 6-mercaptopurine)
 

should be offered for patients who cannot tolerate or who decline other treatments.

TREATMENT OF APL PATIENTS
These recommendations largely follow the ELN APL treat- ment guidelines that were updated in 2019.106 Treatment of APL patients should be centralised in hospitals with proven experience in APL treatment and haematological intensive care. Non-high-risk APL patients defined by a WBC count
10 10 /l should be treated with ATO and ATRA (Figure 4 and supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology online) [I, A]. Non-high-risk patients continuously receive ATO/ATRA until day 28, or up to day 60 if no CR/CRi is achieved by day 28. Missed doses due to adverse events should be appended to this schedule. As all patients will likely achieve CR, it is sufficient to repeat BM assessment only after haematological recovery. Patients with CR/CRi are given time for neutrophil and platelet recovery without treatment. Consolidation treatment with ATO/ATRA should be started as soon as possible after count recovery. Four 8-week consolidation cycles with ATO/ATRA are recom- mended (supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology online), providing excellent cure rates to these patients.34,107 Comparable cure rates can be also achieved with a more condensed infusion scheme of ATO.108 If ATO is not available/affordable for first-line treatment, the classical combination of ATRA and anthracycline-based ChT is still an acceptable option, which however requires 2-year mainte- nance therapy with methotrexate and 6-mercaptopurine.
APL high-risk patients defined by a WBC count >10 109/l may be treated with either ATRA plus ATO combined with an anthracycline (while ATO is not approved for high- risk APL) or with conventional ATRA plus anthracycline-
based ChT [e.g. ATRA and idarubicin (AIDA)] [II, A] (see supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology
 
online). In the AIDA regimen, the induction and consolida- tion treatments are followed by a 2-year maintenance phase.109 The combination of ATRA and ATO with idarubicin during induction followed by ATRA and ATO for consolida- tion and 2-year maintenance of ATRA, 6-mercaptopurine and methotrexate in a single-arm phase II trial resulted in
excellent outcomes also in high-risk patients, suggesting good activity in this patient population.110
To prevent differentiation syndrome, patients should be treated prophylactically with steroids as soon as they receive ATRA (e.g. prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg/day) and with hydroxycarbamide as soon as the WBC count increases above 5e10 109/l. Bleeding is the most frequent cause of early death in APL patients. Adequate support is recommended with fibrinogen or fresh-frozen plasma and platelets to maintain levels above 1.0e1.5 g/l and >30e50 109/l, respectively.
MRD assessment in APL patients is discussed in the
‘Response assessment’ section.
Patients relapsing after ATRA and ChT or relapsing >24 months after the end of ATO/ATRA treatment should receive ATO/ATRA for reinduction and consolidation until achieve- ment of second molecular remission [IV, B]. In the unlikely
event of an early relapse (within 24 months) after treatment with ATO/ATRA, we recommend ATRA with ChT or, in pa- tients not eligible for ChT, GO with or without ATO/ATRA [IV, B] (Figure 5).111,112 For patients in second molecular CR, autoHCT is recommended for consolidation [IV, B].113 For MRD-positive or refractory patients after salvage treatment, alloHCT is the preferred consolidation treatment. If alloHCT is not feasible, treatment with GO, with or without ATO/ATRA, may be considered (Figure 5) [IV, C]. The CNS is involved in 10% of relapsing patients. Treatment of patients with CNS involvement should include ATO, which crosses the blood- brain barrier to some extent (CSF ATO levels were 17.7% of plasma levels).114 Because of the haemorrhagic risk, how- ever, lumbar puncture should not be carried out in patients with haematological relapse and should be postponed in these cases to the end of induction.


PERSONALISED MEDICINE
AML has long been the paradigm disease for personalised treatment approaches. Current and prospective uses of biomarkers for personalised diagnosis, prognostication and treatment are shown in supplementary Table S8, available at Annals of Oncology online.
