
 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
 
Annals of Oncology 29 (Supplement 4): iv166–iv191, 2018 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy152
Published online 24 July 2018
 

 

 

M. Fallon1, R. Giusti2, F. Aielli3, P. Hoskin4, R. Rolke5, M. Sharma6 & C. I. Ripamonti7, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, IGMM, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK; 2Medical Oncology Unit, Sant’Andrea Hospital of Rome, Rome; 3Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy; 4Mount Vernon Cancer Centre, Northwood, Hertfordshire, UK; 5Department of Palliative Medicine, Medical Faculty RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany; 6The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK; 7Department of Onco-Haematology, Fondazione IRCCS, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: December 2004, last update April 2018. This publication supersedes the previously published version—Ann Oncol 2012; 23(Suppl 7): vii139–vii154.


 

 
Pain is common in cancer patients, particularly in the advanced stage of disease when the prevalence is estimated to be more than 70% [1], contributing to poor physical and emotional well-being. The most comprehensive systematic review indi- cates pain prevalence ranging from 33% in patients after cura- tive treatment, to 59% in patients on anticancer treatment and to 64% in patients with metastatic, advanced or terminal disease [2]. Pain has a high prevalence earlier in disease in specific can- cer types such as pancreatic (44%) and head and neck cancer (40%) [3].
Increased survival with either life-prolonging treatment or curative treatment results in increased numbers of patients expe- riencing persistent pain due to treatment or disease, or a combin- ation of both [4]. Approximately 5%–10% of cancer survivors have chronic severe pain that interferes significantly with func- tioning [5].
Despite guidelines and the availability of opioids (the mainstay of moderate to severe cancer pain management), undertreatment is common.
European studies [6] confirmed these data from the United States, showing that different types of pain or pain syndromes were present in all stages of cancer (Table 1) and were not ad- equately treated in a significant percentage of patients, ranging from 56% to 82.3%.
According to a systematic review published in 2014 [7] using the Pain Management Index (PMI) [8], approximately one-third of patients do not receive appropriate analgesia proportional to their pain intensity (PI).
 
High prevalence has also been documented in haematology patients at diagnosis, during therapy and in the last month of life [9]. These data reinforce the recommendation that patients with advanced or metastatic cancer require management within an integrated system for palliative care [7]. Cancer-related pain may be presented as a major issue of healthcare systems world-
wide: ~14.1 million new cancer cases and 8.2 million deaths occurred worldwide in 2012, based on GLOBOCAN estimates
[10] and incidence will be > 15 million in 2020, based on projec- tions [11].


 
Initial and ongoing assessment of pain should be an integral part of cancer care and indicates when additional comprehensive as- sessment is needed (Table 2). The regular self-reporting of PI with the help of validated assessment tools is the first step towards effective and individualised treatment. The most frequently used standardised scales [12] are reported in Figure 1 and are the visual analogue scale (VAS), the verbal rating scale (VRS) and the nu- merical rating scale (NRS).
Assessment of the pain descriptors improves the choice of ther- apy. Pain can be:
(i)	Nociceptive: caused by ongoing tissue damage, either som- atic (such as bone pain) or visceral (such as gut or hepatic pain); or
(ii)	Neuropathic: caused by damage or dysfunction in the ner- vous system, such as in brachial plexopathy or in spinal cord compression by tumour [13].
 


VC   The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 




Table 1. Non-tumour-related causes of pain in cancer patients

Acute procedural pain	Iatrogenic pain causes	Comorbidity-related pain	Pain in cancer survivors

 
Adjuvant setting
–	Diagnostic intervention
–	Lumbar puncture 6 headache
–	Transthoracic needle biopsy
–	Endoscopy 6 visceral dilatation
–	Bone marrow aspiration/biopsy
–	Blood sampling
–	Central line position
–	Arterial line injections
–	Medication of skin ulcers
–	Myelography and lumbar puncture
–	Thoracentesis
 

–	Surgery
–	Chemotherapy
–	Hormonal therapy
–	Targeted therapy
–	Osteonecrosis of the jaw
–	RT
–	Steroids (pain due to skin lesions, periph- eral neuropathy, mucositis, aseptic femoral head necrosis, infections)
 

–	Cardiovascular
–	Pulmonary
–	Diabetic neuropathy
–	Vasomotor headache
–	Fibromyalgia
–	May be worsened by anticancer treatments and/or cancer-related pain
–	Postherpetic neuralgia
–	Acute thrombosis pain
 

–	Follow-up procedures
–	Persisting postsurgical pain
–	Persisting anticancer drug-related pain
–	Persisting RT-related pain
–	Postherpetic neuralgia
 

 
Neo-adjuvant setting
–	As adjuvant setting plus diagnostic and prognostic tissue biopsy
 

–	As adjuvant setting without surgery-related pain
 

–	As adjuvant setting	– As adjuvant setting
 

 
Locally advanced setting
–	As adjuvant setting plus pleurodesis, tumour embolisation, suprapubic catheterisation and nephrostomy insertion
 

–	As adjuvant setting plus cryosurgery, ther- mal ablation, TACE, spinal/epidural injec- tion and opioid hyperalgesia
 

–	As adjuvant setting	– As adjuvant setting
 

 
Metastatic setting
–	As locally advanced setting plus liver, lung or soft tissue diagnostic biopsies, wound care and movement procedural pain
 

–	As neo-adjuvant setting	– As adjuvant setting	– As adjuvant setting plus synergistic pain
effects between iatrogenic and disease- related causes in long-term cancer survivors
 

RT, radiotherapy; TACE, transarterial chemoembolisation.
 
Table 2. Guidelines for the adequate assessment of the patient with pain at any stage of the disease

1.	Assess and re-assess the pain
Causes, onset, type, site, absence/presence of radiating pain, duration, intensity, relief and temporal patterns of the pain, number of BTcPs, pain syndrome, inferred pathophysiology, pain at rest and/or moving
Presence of trigger factors and signs and symptoms associated with the pain Presence of relieving factors
Use of analgesics and their efﬁcacy and tolerability Description of the pain quality:
–	Aching, throbbing, pressure: often associated with somatic pain in skin, muscle and bone
–	Aching, cramping, gnawing, sharp: often associated with visceral pain in organs or viscera
–	Shooting, sharp, stabbing, tingling, ringing: often associated with NP caused by nerve damage

2.	Assess and re-assess the patient
Clinical situation by means of a complete/speciﬁc physical examination and the speciﬁc radiological and/or biochemical investigations Interference of pain with the patient’s daily activities, work, social life, sleep patterns, appetite, sexual functioning, mood, well-being and coping Impact of the pain, the disease and the therapy on the physical, psychological and social conditions
Presence of a caregiver, psychological status, degree of awareness of the disease, anxiety and depression and suicidal ideation, his/her social environment, QoL, spiritual concerns/needs, problems in communication, personality disorders
Presence and intensity of signs, physical and/or emotional symptoms associated with cancer pain syndromes Presence of comorbidities (i.e. diabetic, renal and/or hepatic failure, etc.)
Functional status
Presence of opiophobia or misconception related to pain treatment Alcohol and/or substance abuse

3.	Assess and re-assess your ability to inform and to communicate with the patient and the family
Spend time with the patient and the family to understand their needs


BTcP, breakthrough cancer pain; NP, neuropathic pain; QoL, quality of life.





Figure 1. Validated and most frequently used pain assessment tools.
 
Most patients with advanced cancer have at least two types of cancer- related pain, resulting from a variety of pathophysiology [14].
Initial assessment of cancer-related pain for all patients should include:
(i)	Ask a key screening question, which is not paraphrased and
is used consistently. That question should be: ‘What has been your worst pain in the last 24 hours on a scale of 0–10?’, where 0 is no pain and 10 is the worst imaginable [15].
(ii)	Monitor if the pain is < 3.
(iii)	Move to a more detailed assessment if the worst pain is 3 or if the patient is distressed by pain (as per Table 2). This should also include average pain and pain ‘right now’.
(iv)	Administer appropriate analgesic and reassess both pain and analgesic side effects.
(v)	Review analgesic regimen if side effects to prescribed anal- gesics are present and/or pain persists.
Recommendation:
•	The intensity of pain and the treatment outcomes should be assessed regularly and consistently using the VAS or NRS using the question: ‘What has been your worst pain in the last 24 hours?’ [V, D].
In elderly patients, limited communicative skills and/or cognitive impairment make self-reporting of pain more difficult, although there is no evidence of clinical reduction in pain-related suffering.
When cognitive deficits are severe, observation of pain-related behaviours and discomfort (e.g. facial expression, body move- ments, verbalisation or vocalisations, changes in interpersonal interactions, changes in routine activity) is an alternative strategy for assessing the presence of pain (but not its intensity) [16]. Observational scales are available [16]; however, none is validated in different languages. Sensitivity to a light touch can signal neuropathic pain (NP). A detailed appraisal of the literature per- taining to pain assessment in patients with cognitive impairment is outside the scope of this guideline but, given the global chal- lenge and projected increase in dementia, this will become in- creasingly important [17].
Assessment and management of pain in children are not con- sidered in this manuscript, but guidelines have been developed by the World Health Organization (WHO) [18].
Recommendation:
•	Observation of pain-related behaviours and discomfort is indicated in patients with cognitive impairment to assess the presence of pain [V, C].
Psychosocial distress is strongly associated with cancer pain and should be assessed [19]. Psychological distress may amplify pain and similarly, inadequately controlled pain may cause psy- chological distress [20].
Recommendation:
•	The assessment of all components of suffering, such as psy- chosocial distress, should be considered and evaluated [II, B].


 
Patients must be informed about possible onset of pain at any stage of the disease, both during/after diagnostic interventions and as a
 
consequence of cancer and/or anticancer treatments. Patients should be empowered and encouraged to communicate with the physician and/or the nurse about their suffering, the efficacy of therapy and side effects. Patient education should include infor- mation on the appropriate use of opioids; this should be set in con- text with other analgesic and non-pharmacological approaches [21]. Patient involvement in pain management improves both communication and pain relief through enhancing both patient understanding and physician assessment and prescribing [22, 23].
It is important to prescribe a therapy that can be managed sim- ply by patients and families themselves. The oral route, if well tol- erated, should be considered as the preferred route of administration [24, 25].
Breakthrough cancer pain (BTcP), defined as ‘a transitory flare of pain that occurs on a background of relatively well-controlled baseline pain’, requires careful assessment and appropriate man- agement. Typical BTcP episodes are of moderate to severe inten- sity, rapid in onset (minutes) and of relatively short duration (median 30 minutes) [26].
Recommendations:
•	Patients should be informed about pain and pain manage- ment and should be encouraged to take an active role in their pain management [II, B].
•	The onset of pain should be prevented by means of around-the- clock (ATC) administration, taking into account the half-life, bioavailability and duration of action of different drugs [II, B].
•	Analgesics for chronic pain should be prescribed on a regular basis and not on an ‘as required’ schedule [V, D].
•	The oral route of administration of analgesic drugs should be advocated as the ﬁrst choice [IV, C].
The type and dose of analgesic drugs are influenced by the PI and must be promptly adjusted to reach a balance between optimal pain relief and minimum side effects. Rescue doses [as-needed (prn) doses] should be prescribed proactively for the relief of BTcP pain and to overcome end-of-dose failure. Rescue medication used for end-of-dose failure should help with calcu- lating the daily titration of regular doses.
The oral route is preferred except when oral intake is not pos- sible because of severe vomiting, bowel obstruction, severe dys- phagia or severe confusion, and in the case of poor pain control which requires rapid dose escalation and/or in the presence of oral opioid-related adverse effects.
The WHO proposes a strategy (currently under review) for cancer pain treatment based on a sequential three-step analgesic ladder, from non-opioids to weak opioids to strong opioids, according to PI [24]. The WHO ladder recommends non-opioid analgesics as possible options at all steps; however, this is of greater relevance for the first two steps of the WHO ladder. In practical terms, this means paracetamol and non-steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (step 1). Opioid analgesics are the mainstay of analgesic therapy and are classified according to ability to control pain from mild to moderate (step 2) to moder- ate to severe intensity (step 3) [24–26]. However, some authors have suggested eliminating the second step of the analgesic ladder, with weak opioids being replaced with low doses of oral morphine [27, 28].
 
Analgesic drugs are only one part of cancer pain management, and an integrated approach to cancer pain management should be adopted; this should incorporate:
(i)	primary antitumour treatments;
(ii)	interventional analgesic therapy and
(iii)	a variety of non-invasive techniques such as psychological and rehabilitative interventions [29].


 
Paracetamol and NSAIDs are universally accepted as part of the treatment of cancer pain at any stage of the WHO analgesic lad- der. Several relevant systematic reviews are available regarding the efficacy of paracetamol and NSAIDs for cancer pain manage- ment, either when used alone or in combination with opioids.

Paracetamol
Paracetamol is the mainstay of the first two steps of the WHO an- algesic ladder in many countries. However, a Cochrane systemat- ic review highlights the lack of knowledge about the effectiveness of paracetamol for cancer pain [30].

NSAIDs
In 2017, Cochrane identified 11 studies of oral NSAIDs in adults with cancer pain [31]. These included 949 participants; however, no studies examined the effects of NSAIDs together with an opi- oid (such as morphine), although this is how they are often used. All studies were compromised by small numbers. With any NSAID, moderate or severe cancer pain was reduced to no worse than mild pain in 26%–51% of patients, after 1 or 2 weeks in 4 of the 11 studies.
Based on this 2017 Cochrane review, there is no conclusive evi- dence to support or refute the use of NSAIDs alone or in combin- ation with opioids for the treatment of mild cancer pain. (There is limited evidence that some people with moderate or severe can- cer pain can obtain substantial levels of benefit within 1 or 2 weeks.)
It is important to monitor and reassess the long-term use of NSAIDs or cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2) selective inhibitors [32] because of their significant toxicity (e.g. gastrointestinal bleeding, platelet dysfunction and renal failure). COX-2 selective inhibitors may increase the risk of thrombotic cardiovascular adverse reac- tions [33] and do not reduce the risk of renal failure.
Dipyrone is another non-opioid analgesia that a recent system- atic review concluded could be used for the treatment of cancer pain, alone or in combination with opioids [34].
Recommendations:
•	Analgesic treatment should start with drugs indicated by the WHO analgesic ladder appropriate for the severity of pain [II, B].
•	There is no signiﬁcant evidence to support or refute the use of paracetamol alone or in combination with opioids for mild to moderate pain [I, C].
•	There is no signiﬁcant evidence to support or refute the use of NSAIDs alone or in combination with opioids for mild to moderate pain [I, C].
 
 
There are few options to treat mild to moderate cancer pain be- fore moving to strong opioids such as morphine. Tramadol, dihydrocodeine and codeine are the widely available options.

Tramadol
There is widespread use of tramadol in palliative care, even though the data on its use are limited and adverse effects can be severe [27, 35, 36]. Tramadol has a potential role on step 2 of the analgesic ladder, particularly if other step 2 drugs are not toler- ated, but adequate studies comparing tramadol with other step 2 drugs (e.g. codeine or dihydrocodeine) are missing.
Tramadol can have significant side effects, such as dizziness, nausea, vomiting and constipation [37]. Tramadol affects sero- tonin metabolism or availability, potentially leading to serotonin toxicity, particularly in the elderly, and can lower seizure thresh- olds. Tramadol has a much-reduced analgesic effect in cyto- chrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) poor metabolisers.

Dihydrocodeine
Dihydrocodeine is also a substrate for CYP2D6; its partial metab- olism is limited in poor metabolisers and is blocked by CYP2D6 inhibitors. However, there is no evidence that such inhibition reduces its analgesic effect.

Codeine
Codeine has no or little analgesic effect until metabolised to mor- phine, mainly via CYP2D6. In poor metabolisers, it is therefore essentially ineffective, while in ultrarapid metabolisers, it is po- tentially toxic.
The second step of the WHO ladder has several controversial aspects. The first criticism concerns the absence of a definitive proof of efficacy of weak opioids. A meta-analysis of data from randomised controlled trials (RCTs) showed no significant difference between the effectiveness of non-opioid analgesics alone and non-opioids in combination with weak opioids [38]. The available studies do not demonstrate a clear difference in the effectiveness of the drugs between the first and the second step [39]. A 2014 Cochrane review of weak opioids in cancer pain including 15 studies with 721 participants, although providing newer data, was not able to help formulate recommen- dations [40].
The available evidence indicates that codeine is more effective against cancer pain in adults than placebo, but with increased risk of nausea, vomiting and constipation [41].
Work is evolving in the exploration of the place of step 2 in the WHO three-step ladder. Historical work with uncontrolled stud- ies showed that the effectiveness of the second step of the WHO ladder has a time limit of 30–40 days for most patients and that the shift to the third step is mainly due to insufficient analgesia, and ‘ceiling effect’ with weak opioids, rather than to adverse effects [42].
Given the lack of data on effectiveness of tramadol, dihydroco- deine and codeine on cancer pain, many authors have proposed the abolition of the second step of the WHO analgesic ladder, in fa- vour of the early use of morphine at low doses, which is not in the
 
current WHO guideline. The evidence base is evolving, with one study in favour of a low-dose morphine approach already reported and results from another RCT expected shortly [27, 28].
Recommendations:
•	For mild to moderate pain, weak opioids such as tramadol, dihydrocodeine and codeine can be given in combination with non-opioid analgesics [III, C].
•	As an alternative to weak opioids, low doses of strong opioids could be an option, although this recommendation is not cur- rently part of WHO guidance [II, C].
•	There is no evidence of increase in adverse effects from the use of low-dose strong opioids instead of the standard step 2 approach with weak opioids [II, C].


 
Strong opioids

Strong opioids are the mainstay of analgesic therapy in treating moderate to severe cancer-related pain. Although a variety of strong opioids exist and there is no superiority of one over an- other, morphine is the most widely available and prescribed.
In spite of the global agreement that access to opioids is essen- tial, both access to and use of opioids remains poor in many countries. Various factors contribute to poor access and use, which is still problematic in Eastern and South Eastern Europe [43–47].
According to the last European Society for Medical Oncology– European Association of Palliative Care (ESMO–EAPC) report [48], morphine, methadone, oxycodone, hydromorphone, fen- tanyl, alfentanil, buprenorphine, diamorphine, levorphanol and oxymorphone are all used in Europe. In some countries, the con- sumption of oxycodone and patches of fentanyl and buprenor- phine has increased [49], and the WHO list of essential medicines includes morphine, methadone and fentanyl patches for the management of cancer pain [36]. New combination opioid prep- arations are now available, e.g. oxycodone/naloxone, which have been shown to be potentially useful in reducing opioid-induced constipation (OIC).
The last Cochrane systematic review published in 2016 ana- lysed 62 studies with 4241 participants [50] and supported the use of oral morphine as an effective analgesic for cancer pain, with a low rate (6%) of reported intolerable adverse events. Transdermal fentanyl also achieved similar rates of effective anal- gesia and has also been advocated as an effective and tolerable an- algesic [51].
Although the non-parenteral route of administration is advo- cated where appropriate, patients presenting with severe pain that needs urgent relief should be treated and titrated with paren- teral opioids, usually administered by the subcutaneous (s.c.) or intravenous (i.v.) route.
When converting from oral to parenteral morphine, the dose should be divided by two or three to get a roughly equianalgesic effect, but upward or downward dose adjustment may be required [52].
In general, adjustment of opioid doses is required in renal dys- function. Accumulation of toxic metabolites can cause a variety
 
of distressing and life-threatening symptoms, including confu- sion, drowsiness and hallucinations. The latter group of symp- toms, known as opioid toxicity, can be associated with a terminal decline, especially in the frail patient. Smaller doses with wider dosing intervals should be used in mild renal dysfunction. Preferred opioids for patients with moderate to severe dysfunc- tion or on dialysis are buprenorphine or fentanyl, as discussed below [53].
Recommendations:
•	The opioid of ﬁrst choice for moderate to severe cancer pain is oral morphine [I, A].
•	The average relative potency ratio of oral to i.v. morphine is between 1:2 and 1:3 [II, A].
•	The average relative potency ratio of oral to s.c. morphine is between 1:2 and 1:3 [IV, C].
Oxycodone or hydromorphone, in both immediate-release and modified-release formulations for oral administration, and oral methadone are effective alternatives to oral morphine [54].
Transdermal (t.d.) fentanyl and t.d. buprenorphine are best reserved for patients with stable opioid requirements; however, the use of lower strength t.d. fentanyl preparations in patients with unstable opioid requirements requires examination. The t.d. route is usually contraindicated during the titration phase, in opi- oid-na¨ıve patients or to control BTcP [55]. t.d. fentanyl can be useful in patients with nausea, vomiting, problems with swallow- ing, constipation and poor compliance.
The latest Cochrane systematic review showed insufficient comparable data for meta-analysis to be undertaken; however, the evidence pointed to a significant reduction in constipation for t.d. fentanyl-treated patients compared with oral morphine [56].
Given the heterogeneity and complexities of patients with can- cer pain, choice of opioid is important to achieve an optimum balance between analgesia and unwanted adverse effects. Buprenorphine has a role in the analgesic therapy of patients with renal impairment undergoing haemodialysis treatment [57]; as buprenorphine is mainly excreted in the stool, a dose reduction is not normally needed. The dose conversion from other opioids to buprenorphine can be complex; therefore, palliative care advice is recommended.
Extensive reviews [58, 59] demonstrate that oral methadone has the potential to control pain that does not respond to mor- phine or other opioids, because methadone shows significant in- complete cross-tolerance with other mu opioid receptor agonist analgesics. Moreover, it can be useful (instead of other opioids) when accumulation of active metabolites is the suspected cause of side effects such as myoclonus, sedation, confusion, nausea and vomiting [60]. This strategy is called opioid switching. Methadone is an effective alternative to oral morphine, oxy- codone, hydromorphone and t.d. fentanyl, but because of marked inter-individual differences in the plasma half-life of methadone, attention is required when using this drug in treating chronic cancer pain. Although morphine and methadone dem- onstrate approximately the same analgesic potency after single- dose administration, a reduction of the equianalgesic dose by one-fourth to one-twelfth is recommended when switching from another opioid to methadone [61, 62]. Therefore, methadone is
 

 

 
still considered a drug that should be administered by physicians with experience and expertise in its use.
The low cost of methadone makes it more affordable for devel- oping countries and methadone, along with t.d. fentanyl, is included on the WHO list of essential medicines [36].
Recommendation:
•	Fentanyl and buprenorphine (via the t.d. or i.v. route) are the safest opioids in patients with chronic kidney disease stages
4 or 5 (estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate < 30 mL/min)
[III, B].
After starting the prescribed initial opioid, clinical efficacy may decrease gradually with time or even suddenly, resulting in a need to increase the dose. In some cases, dose increases do not provide analgesia, and further dose increments are ineffective. Alternatively, adverse effects that are difficult to control with symptomatic therapies may occur [63].
When an opioid fails to provide adequate analgesia or causes
unmanageable adverse effects, it should be discontinued, and a different opioid should be offered [64]. Opioid switching (also known as opioid rotation) is the process of substituting one opi- oid for another one to improve the opioid response, either by improving pain relief or by reducing the intensity of adverse effects [65].
No RCTs have investigated the efficacy of opioid switching.
However, a switch to an alternative opioid is frequently used in clinical practice. This approach requires familiarity with equia- nalgesic doses of the different opioids.
There is no evidence that one sequence is better than another.
Thus, the choice of a conversion ratio between opioids during switching should not be a mere mathematical calculation, but part of a more comprehensive assessment of opioid therapy. This should evaluate the underlying clinical situation, pain and ad- verse effect intensity, comorbidities and concomitant drugs and, in addition, exclude any possible pharmacokinetic factor that could limit the effectiveness of certain drugs [66]. Evidence- based recommendations from the EAPC have been developed for conversion ratios during opioid switching [67].
When switching from one opioid drug to another, dose con-
version ratios can be recommended with different levels of confi- dence (Table 3) [61, 62, 68–84]. These conversion ratios are
 
specific for patients for whom analgesia from the first opioid is satisfactory.
The conversion ratio from oral morphine to oral methadone is affected by previous opioid dose and varies widely from 1:5 to 1:12 or more [67]. Calculation is also complicated by the long half-life of methadone and several aspects of clinical practice (Table 3) [67] and it should be used only by experienced professionals.
Recommendation:
•	A different opioid should be considered in the absence of ad- equate analgesia (despite opioid dose escalation) or in the presence of unacceptable opioid side effects [III, C].
For patients who cannot swallow, those with nausea and vom- iting or those at the end of life who are unable to continue with oral medication because of weakness or debility, parenteral opi- oid administration might be necessary [85]. In some cases, the use of existing venous access may be considered.
A systematic literature review of 18 studies comparing different parenteral routes of administration for cancer pain control showed similar efficacy and tolerability of both s.c. and i.v. routes of administration and no difference in the dose used, but pain re- lief was faster with the i.v. route [85].
Recommendations:
•	The s.c. route is simple and effective for the administration of morphine, diamorphine and hydromorphone and it should be the ﬁrst-choice alternative route for patients unable to re- ceive opioids by oral or t.d. routes [III, B].
•	i.v. infusion should be considered when s.c. administration is contraindicated (peripheral oedema, coagulation disorders, poor peripheral circulation and need for high volumes and doses) [III, B].
•	i.v. administration is an option for opioid titration when rapid pain control is needed [III, B].

Scheduling and titration. Opioid doses should be titrated to take effect as rapidly as possible. Titration is a process in which the opioid dose is modified speedily to achieve adequate relief of pain without unacceptable side effects. The established practice with immediate-release oral morphine every 4 hours is based only on the pharmacokinetic profile of this formulation [tmax (time after
 
administration when the maximum plasma concentration is reached) < 1 hour; t1/2b (elimination half-life) ¼ 2–3 hours; dur- ation of effect ~4 hours)] [68]. Immediate-release formulations are much more flexible than long-acting preparations. Individual
titration of opioid should usually start at the minimum recom- mended dose and increase until optimum analgesia without un- acceptable side effects is reached [86]. One small RCT did not show significant differences between titration with immediate- versus modified-release oral morphine [87].
In patients with severe pain, i.v. titration is strongly suggested (Table 4). i.v. administration of morphine (e.g. 1.5 mg every 10 minutes) for rapid titration in cases of severe pain has been shown to be effective within an hour in most patients [88]. The relative potency ratio of oral to i.v. morphine in patients receiving chronic treatment for cancer pain was 3:1, and the ratio is similar for oral to s.c. morphine [89].
Following the titration period, slow-release opioids can be used [86].
All patients should receive ATC dosing with provision of a res- cue or breakthrough dose to manage transient exacerbations of pain. A breakthrough dose is usually equivalent to 10%–15% of the total daily dose. If more than four rescue doses per day are ne- cessary, the baseline opioid treatment with a slow-release formu- lation must be adapted. Opioids with a rapid onset of analgesia and short duration are preferred as rescue medications.
Recommendations:
•	Individual titration, e.g. normal-release morphine adminis- tered every 4 hours plus rescue doses (up to hourly) for BTcP, is recommended in clinical practice [IV, C].
 
•	Immediate and slow-release oral morphine formulations can be used to titrate the dose. Titration schemes for both types of formulation should be supplemented with immediate- release oral opioids, prescribed as required for BTcP [III, B].
•	The regular dose of slow-release opioids can be adjusted to take into account the total amount of rescue morphine [IV, C].


Management of opioid side effects. Many patients develop adverse effects from opioid therapy such as bowel dysfunction (e.g. con- stipation, bloating, incomplete evacuation, increased gastric re- flux), nausea, vomiting, pruritus, respiratory depression and central nervous system (CNS) toxicities [drowsiness, cognitive impairment, confusion, hallucinations, myoclonic jerks and rare- ly, opioid-induced hyperalgesia (OIH)]. OIH presents as a sig- nificant escalation of pain and emergence of sensitivity to a light touch that can be generalised.
The management of opioid-induced adverse effects is an im-
portant aspect of pain management because each adverse effect requires a careful assessment and treatment strategy [90]. However, there are few studies in this area.
Opioid dose reduction can reduce the incidence and/or sever- ity of adverse events. To achieve an opioid reduction, an add- itional strategy may be necessary, such as a co-analgesic, nerve block or radiotherapy (RT). Since some adverse effects may be caused by accumulation of toxic opioid metabolites, switching to another opioid agonist and/or another route may improve ad- verse effects. This is especially true for symptoms of CNS toxicity such as OIH/allodynia and myoclonic jerks [91].
 



Table 4. i.v. titration (dose ﬁnding) with morphine for severe cancer pain

RCT [88]	Initial dosage	Following dosage	Results

 
62 strong opioid-na¨ıve patients i.v. group:
1.5 mg bolus every 10 min until
 
i.v. group:
Oral IR morphine every 4 h, on
 
Percentage of patients achieving satisfactory pain relief
 
PI NRS ≥ 5
Patients were randomised to receive:
–	i.v. morphine then IR oral morphine
(dose equal to i.v. dose) (i.v. group, N=31)
or
–	oral IR morphine (oral group, N=31)
 
pain relief (or adverse effects)

Oral group:
IR morphine 5 mg every 4 h in opioid-naive patients, 10 mg in patients already on weak opioids

Rescue dose:
The same dose every 1 h max
 
the basis of the previous i.v. requirements (i.v. to p.o. conversion 1:1)

Oral group:
Follow the same scheme

Rescue dose:
The same dose every 1 h max
 

After 1 h:
i.v. group 84%, oral group 25% (P<0.001)
After 12 h:
i.v. group 97%, oral group 76% (P<0.001)
After 24 h:
i.v. group and oral group similar

Median morphine dosage to achieve pain relief
i.v. group:
i.v. 4.5 mg (range 1.5–34.5). p.o. 8.3 mg (range 2.5–30) after stabilisation
Oral group:
7.2 mg (range 2.5–15)

No signiﬁcant adverse events
 

IR, immediate release; i.v., intravenous; NRS, numerical rating scale; PI, pain intensity; p.o., orally (per os); RCT, randomised controlled trial.
 
There is little evidence for the use of methylphenidate or simi- lar drugs in the management of opioid-induced sedation and cognitive disturbance [91, 92].
Metoclopramide and antidopaminergic drugs are used fre- quently for treatment of opioid-related nausea/vomiting. ESMO/ Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer (MASCC) have published guidelines on the use of these drugs [93].
There are no prospective, randomised studies on the treatment of opioid-induced pruritus. Antihistamines and 5-HT3 (sero- tonin) antagonists are commonly recommended. Opioid rota- tion may represent an additional choice [64, 89].
The most common manifestation of bowel dysfunction is OIC; reduction in bowel movement frequency, increased straining, in- complete evacuation and hard stools [94]. First-line treatments for OIC typically involve a combination stimulant and softer laxative, increased dietary fibre and fluid intake, along with exer- cise. However, more than half of patients remain constipated [95]. A newer class of agents which try to address the underlying pathophysiology of OIC are called peripherally acting mu opioid receptor antagonists (PAMORAs), such as naloxegol. Naloxegol has been approved for treatment of OIC in patients with cancer- related or non-cancer pain in the European Union (EU) [96]. Other studies are ongoing with similar drugs, such as naldeme- dine (S-297995) [97]. Methylnaltrexone administered by s.c. in- jection is available for the treatment of OIC resistant to traditional laxatives; however, data on outcomes are limited [95]. Naloxone, a short-acting opioid antagonist is administered by i.v. to reverse symptoms of accidental severe opioid overdose (e.g. re- spiratory depression, significant sedation) [90]; however, this is not appropriate for OIC management. The use of an oral prolonged- release (PR) combination formulation of oxycodone and naloxone is now established in practice [98]. Combined opioid/naloxone medications have been shown to reduce the risk of OIC through a
range of open label, phase II and phase III studies [II, B] [99].
PR oxycodone/naloxone versus PR oral oxycodone alone was reported in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial [98] evaluating both analgesia and bowel function. Two-hundred and two opioid- stable patients (mainly non-cancer), taking 40–60 mg oxycodone daily, were randomised to either naloxone (10–40 mg daily) or pla- cebo. The Bowel Function Inventory (BFI) was used to assess con- stipation. Patients taking a combined oral therapy reported significant improvements in bowel function compared with those only taking PR oral oxycodone, with no loss of analgesic efficiency. This outcome has been supported in a more recent review of litera- ture of clinical trials and observational studies into the evidence for PR oxycodone/naloxone treating moderate to severe pain and spe- cific impact on opioid-induced bowel dysfunction (OIBD) [99]. Thirty-eight clinical trials and observation studies were reported of which seven were undertaken with a cancer population [100–107]. Other studies reported on patient groups with direct relevance to patients with cancer (e.g. those with NP, pain in the elderly and patients with pain and refractory laxatives symptoms) [99]. Although the method of review is not explicit, the range of evidence presents PR oxycodone/naloxone as an effective treatment for mod- erate to severe pain and effective OIC bowel management for selected patients.
Although these studies demonstrate a growing body of evi- dence particularly in relation to therapies to manage OIC, the overall impact remains relatively small in terms of application to
 
clinical practice, and further studies are needed to support these early data. Some of the study outcomes reported here include an advanced cancer population. Further elaboration of OIC can be found in the ESMO guidelines on constipation [41].
Recommendations:
•	Laxatives must be routinely prescribed for both the prophy- laxis and the management of OIC [I, A].
•	The use of naloxone in association with oxycodone or meth- ylnaltrexone to control OIC may be considered [II, B].
•	Naloxegol has been shown to be highly effective in OIC [II, B], but, to date, there is no speciﬁc reported experience in the cancer population.
•	Metoclopramide and antidopaminergic drugs should be rec- ommended for treatment of opioid-related nausea/vomiting [III, B].
•	Psychostimulants (e.g. methylphenidate) to treat opioid- induced sedation are only advised when other methods to treat this have been tried (e.g. rationalise all medication with a sedative side effect) [II, B].
•	Mu receptor antagonists (e.g. naloxone) must be used promptly in the treatment of opioid-induced respiratory de- pression [I, B].
Medical cannabis
An iterative approach was used starting with an electronic search of the MEDLINE database (via PubMed). The search terms [‘neoplasms’ (Mesh) AND ‘pain’ (Mesh) AND ‘Cannabis’ (Mesh)] were used. Citation tracking and a search for all related eligible articles in PubMed identified 22 items with no eligible RCT in the last 5 years for medical cannabis in cancer pain.
Another PubMed search was carried out without the MESH thesaurus with following search terms [(‘cannabis’ OR ‘cannabi- noids’ OR ‘medical cannabis’ OR ‘cannabis sativa’ OR ‘sativex’) AND ‘cancer pain’]. Results showed 46 items with five eligible clinical trials found by direct searching and cross-references.
Two prior randomised, double-blind phase II/III studies dem- onstrated the analgesic effects of nabiximols [an extract of Cannabis sativa containing two potentially therapeutic cannabi- noids (D9-tetrahydrocannabinol (27 mg/mL) and cannabidiol (25 mg/mL)] in advanced cancer patients with pain not fully alle- viated by opioid therapy [108–110]. Both studies enrolled
patients with baseline scores ≥ 4 on a 0–10-point average daily pain NRS, despite ongoing treatment with opioids. The primary
efficacy endpoint, i.e. 30% response rate on an average daily pain NRS, was similar for nabiximols and placebo (treatment effect,
P ¼ 0.59). However, a secondary continuous responder analysis of average daily pain demonstrated that the proportion of
patients reporting analgesia was greater for nabiximols than pla- cebo overall (P ¼ 0.035), specifically in the low-dose (P ¼ 0.008) and medium-dose (P ¼ 0.039) groups. In the low-dose group, results were similar for mean average pain (P ¼ 0.006), mean worst pain (P ¼ 0.011) and mean sleep disruption (P ¼ 0.003). Confirmatory studies by Fallon et al. [111] describe two phase III,
double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trials in advanced cancer patients with average pain NRS scores ≥ 4 and ≤ 8 at base- line, despite optimised opioid therapy. In Study 1, patients were randomised to nabiximols or placebo, and then self-titrated study
 
medications over a 2-week period per effect and tolerability, fol- lowed by a 3-week treatment period. In Study 2, all patients self- titrated nabiximols over a 2-week period. Patients with a ≥ 15% improvement from baseline in pain score were then randomised 1:1 to nabiximols or placebo, followed by a 5-week treatment
period.
The primary efficacy endpoint in average daily pain NRS scores was not met in either study. Nabiximols did not demonstrate su- periority to placebo in reducing self-reported pain.
Another phase III, double-blind, randomised, placebo- controlled trial in the same population with similar intervention, showed analogue results with nabiximols not superior to placebo on the primary efficacy endpoint [112].
For advanced cancer patients with pain not fully alleviated by opioid therapy, the additive effect of nabiximols to the on- going opioid treatment remains unclear. There is a need for fur- ther double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials with large sample sizes in order to establish the optimal dosage and efficacy of different cannabis-based therapies [II, D].


 
There is no unanimous consensus on definition and characteris- tics of BTcP. Two Delphi surveys published in 2016 defined BTcP as a transient pain exacerbation that can occur in patients with stable and adequately controlled background pain not necessarily treated with opioids [113]. However, the current agreement defines BTcP as an episode of severe pain that occurs in patients receiving a stable opioid regimen for persistent pain sufficient to provide at least mild sustained analgesia. There are many under- lying neurobiological causes of BTcP. The reported prevalence of BTcP varies significantly according to a recent systematic review that included 19 studies; the overall pooled prevalence was 59%, with the lowest prevalence reported in studies in outpatient clin- ics (39%) and the highest prevalence reported in studies con- ducted in the hospice setting (80%) [114]. The lack of validation of BTcP tools has been a limitation; however, an assessment tool for BTcP has been validated [115]. The simple clinical algorithm for the diagnosis of BTcP, proposed by Davies et al. [116], contin- ues to be widely used in practice (Figure 2).
Use of drugs as needed is the conventional treatment of BTcP. There is a major gap in the knowledge of the role of non-opioid analgesics and non-pharmacological approaches to manage BTcP.
Oral opioids, particularly oral morphine, have been the main- stay approach for the management of BTcP. However, the phar- macokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles of oral opioids (onset of analgesia: 20–30 minutes; peak analgesia: 60–90 minutes; dur- ation of effect: 3–6 hours) do not tend to mirror the temporal char- acteristics of most BTcP episodes, resulting in delayed or ineffective analgesia and in ongoing adverse effects. Different for- mulations have been developed to provide fast pain relief with fen- tanyl, delivered by non-invasive routes: oral, transmucosal buccal tablet, sublingual tablet, buccal soluble film, sublingual and intra- nasal spray. Several placebo-controlled RCTs have demonstrated the efficacy of all available transmucosal fentanyl formulations for BTcP [117, 118]. These products called rapid-onset opioids (ROOs) provide an effect clinically observable 10–15 minutes after drug administration. As these products have been tested only in
 
opioid-tolerant patients, the current recommendation is only for patients receiving doses of oral morphine equivalents of at least 60 mg. Two meta-analyses [119, 120] and several systematic reviews [121, 122] have shown a clinical role for all transmucosal fentanyl formulations in BTcP, but there is no evidence for the su- periority of any particular formulation.
Dosing recommendations have been developed for the transmu- cosal formulations as a group, and these share a low initial dose fol- lowed by dose titration to an effective dose. Some non- comparative trials suggest that the tolerability and the safety of an initial dose of a transmucosal formulation are proportionate to the baseline opioid dose, even in elderly patients, patients in the home care setting and in patients receiving a high dose of opioids [123– 125]. A randomised, controlled, non-blinded study carried out in a sample of 82 cancer patients with BTcP receiving strong opioids supported fentanyl buccal tablets (FBTs) in doses proportional to the baseline opioid dose; however, further evidence is required to confirm that this approach should be routinely recommended.
The concept of using fentanyl sublingual tablets instead of s.c. morphine was explored in a double-blind, randomised, non- inferiority trial [126]. At the chosen standard doses of both drugs, non-inferiority was not demonstrated.
Recommendations:
•	Immediate-release opioids should be used to treat BTcP that is opioid-responsive and for which background cancer pain management has been optimised [I, A].
•	Transmucosal fentanyl formulations (oral, buccal, sublingual and intranasal) have a role in unpredictable and rapid-onset BTcP [I, A].
•	There are indications for standard normal-release oral opioids (e.g. morphine) that include a slow-onset BTcP or a pre-emptive administration of oral opioids 30 minutes be- fore a predictable BTcP triggered by known events [II, B].


 
Treatment of bone pain should always take into consideration the use of analgesic drugs (Figure 3). In addition, external beam RT (EBRT), radioisotopes and targeted therapy given in associ- ation with analgesics have an important role in bone pain man- agement (Figure 4).

EBRT
RT is highly effective in the management of metastatic bone pain and in metastatic spinal cord compression (mSCC) [127]. Numerous randomised, prospective trials show improvements in pain relief in 60%–80% of patients after RT, with complete responses (no pain and no increase in an- algesic requirements) in up to 30% [128]. The American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) reviewed rando- mised, published trials on RT for painful bone metastases and found pain relief equivalence for different regimens, including 3 Gy in 10 fractions, 4 Gy in 6 fractions, 4 Gy in 5 fractions and 8 Gy single dose [129]. These data are consist- ent with sequential meta-analyses which have failed to show an advantage for doses greater than a single dose of 8 Gy for pain relief. Although the rate of retreatment after single doses
 

 
 	 
Figure 2. The assessment of BTcP. BTcP, breakthrough cancer pain. Reprinted with permission from [116].

 
is higher, 20% compared with 8%, these data are not system- atic; overall, an 8 Gy single dose should be considered the regimen of choice for patients with painful bone metastases, optimising patient and carer experience. The single dose is also more cost-effective, even when re-irradiation is included [130]. Retreatment of recurrent bone pain has been studied in a large randomised trial comparing 8 Gy single dose with 20–26 Gy in 5 fractions [131]. This trial confirmed the effi- cacy of retreatment with a single dose and showed no disad- vantage; therefore, 8 Gy single dose should also be considered the schedule of choice in re-irradiation.
Stereotactic body RT (SBRT) has emerged as a new treatment option that permits the administration of very high ablative doses—typically in single doses of 10–16 Gy, or hypofractionated schedules: 27 Gy in 3 fractions or 40 Gy in 5 fractions. This tech- nique enables delivery of high doses per fraction, while safely avoiding high doses to critical normal tissues such as the verte- brae or the spinal cord [132].
 
Recommendations:
•	All patients with painful bone metastases should be offered EBRT and the prescription should be 8 Gy single dose [I, A].
•	Patients with recurrent bone pain after previous irradiation
should be offered re-irradiation with a further dose of 8 Gy [I, A].
•	SBRT should be considered for patients with oligometastases having good performance status and well-controlled primary sites, preferably within clinical trials [V, D].

mSCC
Spinal cord compression is an oncological emergency [133]. Pain accompanies mSCC in 95% of patients, and usually precedes the diagnosis by days to months. Pain can be local (back or neck pain), radicular or both. Patients with established neurological deficits have a poor prognosis for recovery; thus, early diagnosis confirmed on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and prompt therapy is critical [134].
 
 









































Figure 3. Treatment of cancer pain.
aDo not switch between weak opioids.
BTcP, breakthrough cancer pain; NRS, numerical rating scale; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug; t.d., transdermal.
 
 



Figure 4. Treatment of pain due to bone metastases.
aPreventive dental measures are necessary before starting administration [III, A].
BP, biphosphonate; EBRT, external beam radiotherapy; HFRT, hypofractionated radiotherapy; mSCC, metastatic spinal cord compression; RT, radiotherapy; SBRT, stereotactic body radiother- apy; SRE, skeletal-related event.
 
Steroids should be given immediately when the clinical and radiological diagnosis of mSCC is confirmed. Dexamethasone is the most frequently used drug. No study to date has compared high-dose with moderate-dose dexamethasone; dexamethasone (16 mg/day) remains the most often used prescription, although doses ranging from moderate (8 mg/day) to ultra-high levels (36– 96 mg/day preceded by a bolus of 10–100 mg i.v.) have been advocated. The steroids are usually tapered over 2 weeks [134].
Surgery is indicated in patients with spinal instability, an un- known primary requiring histology, recurrence after previous RT and solitary sites of compression, particularly in the setting of oli- gometastases in patients with good performance status and a well-controlled primary site. Postoperative RT should follow [127, 133].
RT is the first-line treatment for the majority of patients with mSCC; it provides back pain relief in 50%–58% of cases. There is now good evidence, including three phase III trials, that hypofrac- tionated RT (HFRT) schedules, e.g. 20 Gy in 5 fractions or 8 Gy in 2 fractions, are as effective as more prolonged schedules [133, 135].
For patients who have   a longer predicted life expectancy (> 6 months), higher dose schedules may be considered [136]. The median survival in these clinical trials is 4–6 months. A recent large
randomised phase III trial has shown that 8 Gy in a single dose is as effective as 20 Gy in 5 fractions in this setting for pain control, quality of life (QoL) and neurological outcome [137].
Recommendations:
•	Early diagnosis and prompt therapy are powerful predictors of outcome in mSCC [I, A].
•	The majority of patients with mSCC should receive RT alone but surgery should be considered for selected cases [II, B].
•	HFRT regimens, including a single dose of 8 Gy, can be con- sidered the schedule of choice [I, A] while more protracted RT regimens may be used in selected mSCC patients with a predicted longer life expectancy [I, B].
•	Dexamethasone should be prescribed in patients with mSCC [II, A] in a dose of 8–16 mg daily [III, B].

Targeted therapy and bone pain
Radioisotopes. In selected patients with multiple osteoblastic bone metastases, radioisotope therapy can be highly effective in achiev- ing pain relief in multiple sites. Radioisotope treatment using strontium, samarium or rhenium has been investigated in a sys- tematic review [138]. The results showed only a small beneficial ef- fect on pain control in the short and medium term (1–6 months), with no modification of the analgesics used but relatively frequent adverse effects including leukopaenia and thrombocytopaenia.
A randomised trial has evaluated the effect of radium-223 (an alpha emitter releasing short-range radiation, with little bone mar- row toxicity) in patients with castrate-resistant prostate cancer. This trial has shown improvements in skeletal-related events (SREs), including pain and QoL, as well as survival, and radium-223 is now the radioisotope treatment of choice for prostate cancer [139].
Recommendations:
•	In castrate-resistant prostate cancer patients, radium-223 is effective in reducing SREs, decreasing pain and improving survival [I, A].
 
•	Radioisotope therapy with strontium, samarium or rhenium can be effective in some cases but may cause bone marrow toxicity [II, C].

Bisphosphonates. Bisphosphonates (BPs) form part of the stand- ard therapy for hypercalcaemia and the prevention of SREs in metastatic cancer. The evidence supporting the analgesic efficacy of BPs is weak in patients with bone pain due to bone metastases from solid tumours, predominantly breast and prostate, and also for multiple myeloma, particularly in the short term [140]. BPs should always be used in conjunction with analgesics. One rando- mised trial has shown that a 4 mg i.v. infusion of ibandronate gives equivalent overall pain relief to single-dose RT in prostate cancer [141]. Preventive dental measures to prevent osteonecro- sis of the jaw (ONJ) are required before starting BP treatment [142]. After the first i.v. infusions of BP, a pain flare may be observed, requiring additional use of analgesics.
Recommendations:
•	BPs may be considered as part of the therapeutic regimen for the treatment of patients with bone metastases in patients with a good prognosis [II, C].
•	BPs should be considered especially when pain is not local- ised or RT is not readily accessible [II, C].
•	Preventive dental measures are necessary before starting BP administration [III, A].

Denosumab. Denosumab, a targeted receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) inhibitor, is an effective treat- ment for bone metastases, delaying SREs. Two trials in prostate and breast cancer showed that denosumab was more effective than zoledronate, but this has not been confirmed in other solid tumour types [143, 144].
In a combined analysis in solid tumours, denosumab was more effective than zoledronate, delaying the return of moderate or se- vere pain by an additional 3 months [145]. A systematic review has confirmed that the main effect of denosumab and bisphosph- onates is in delaying the onset of pain rather than acting as an an- algesic for established pain [140].
The prescription of denosumab should be started after pre- ventive dental measures are taken [146].
Recommendations:
•	Denosumab is indicated as an alternative to BPs for the treat- ment of patients with metastatic bone disease from solid tumours and myeloma [I, A].
•	Denosumab is effective in delaying bone pain recurrence [II, C].
•	Preventive dental measures are necessary before starting denosumab administration [III, A].


 
Neuropathic cancer pain arises as a direct consequence of a cancer-induced injury to the somatosensory system. This type of neuropathic cancer pain must be distinguished from other NPs,
e.g. due to cancer treatment [147]. Nerve fibrosis after RT, chemotherapy (ChT)-induced or postsurgical NPs are prominent
 

























 	 










Figure 5. Assessment and treatment of cancer-related NP.
aDoses   75 mg/day.
CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NP, neuropathic pain; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.
 
examples. In a systematic review, the overall prevalence of a neuropathic mechanism varied from 19% to 39.1% among 13 683 patients with cancer pain. Notably, the proportion of pain caused by cancer treatment was higher in NP compared with all types of cancer pain [148].
A probable or definite NP can be identified using the revised definition and grading system proposed by the Neuropathic Pain Special Interest Group (NeuPSIG) of the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) [149].
This NP grading system is based on four criteria:
Criterion 1: neuroanatomical plausible pain distribution; Criterion 2: suggestive history of a relevant lesion or disease; Criterion 3: negative or positive sensory signs within inner-
vation territory of the lesion; and
Criterion 4: conﬁrmation of the lesion by a diagnostic test.
A probable NP can be diagnosed if criteria 1, 2 and 3 or criteria 1, 2 and 4 are present. A definite NP is based on the presence of all four criteria.
When extrapolating treatment findings from studies in patients with NP to patients with cancer-related NP, there is evi- dence from systematic reviews that both tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and anticonvulsant drugs are effective in the manage- ment of NP. The number needed to treat (NNT) for these drugs is 3–7.7 [150, 151].
In cancer patients with NP, non-opioid and opioid analgesics may be combined with TCAs or anticonvulsants. The efficacy and tolerability of the therapy should be monitored over time. A nar- rative analysis from eight studies including five RCTs concluded, on the basis of 370 complete patient datasets, that adjuvants improved pain control within 4–8 days when added to opioids for cancer-related NP, with the strongest evidence supporting gabapentin [152, 153]. However, a pain reduction greater than 1 point, on a 0–10 NRS, was unlikely for that type of combination therapy while, in contrast, an increase in adverse events was likely [154]. Other adjuvants such as steroids should be considered in the case of nerve compression. There is a strong recommendation against the use of levetiracetam and mexiletine in NP [155].
Recommendations:
•	Cancer-related NP can be treated using opioid combination therapies and carefully dosed adjuvants, when opioids alone provide insufﬁcient pain relief [II, B].
•	Patients with NP should be given either a TCA or an anticon- vulsant and be monitored for side effects [I, A].
•	Gabapentin, pregabalin, duloxetine and TCA (doses 75 mg/ day) are strongly recommended as single agents for NP ﬁrst- line treatment [I, A].
•	Interventional treatments of NP are based on weak or incon- clusive evidence and should be restricted to patients with NP syndromes other than those related to cancer [II, C].
Ketamine is a N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist which has been used as an adjunct in challenging cancer pain, in particularly in NP. The preclinical evidence points to an indica- tion of ‘central wind-up’ which can be tested at the bedside. RCTs carried out to date on the benefit of ketamine as an adjuvant to opioids in NP have been negative. The evidence has been of very low quality, meaning that it does not provide a reliable indication of the likely effect, and the likelihood that the effect will be
 
substantially different is high [156]. However, there may be sub- groups of patients with cancer-related NP for whom ketamine could be helpful, such as those with central sensitisation and ‘clinical wind-up’, for whom it is reasonable to hypothesise a more specific analgesic target for ketamine [157].
Recommendation:
•	There is a lack of evidence to support the routine use of keta- mine in cancer NP [II, D].
Preclinical work suggests that patients with central sensitisa- tion, presenting as ‘central wind-up’, are the potential target population and clinical research should be concentrated on this group. This remains an area of research and at present no clinical recommendation can be given for routine use in cancer pain [II, D].


 
Surgical or oncological treatment of cancer can be effective in controlling cancer-related pain but can also be the cause of pain. About 10% of cancer patients have pain that is difficult to manage with oral or parenteral analgesic drugs. Interventional techniques include nerve blocks, neurolytic blocks (including spinal neurolytic blocks and cordotomy) and intrathecal (i.t.) drug delivery (spinal or epidural) [158]. Patients refractory to all conventional strategies and/or with dose-limiting, analgesic- related side effects may achieve pain control with interventional techniques when used alone or, more frequently, in combin- ation with systemic therapy. Two prospective comparative trials between oral and spinal morphine have compared the analgesics and tolerability of morphine administered orally or by epidural [159, 160].
An improvement in pain control as well as in adverse effects was shown by switching from oral to epidural infusion of mor- phine [159]. However, Kalso et al. showed no significant benefits, either in efficacy or in adverse effects, by administering morphine via the epidural route compared with the s.c. route. The authors concluded that the co-administration of local anaesthetic agents, alpha-2-adrenergic agonists or NMDA antagonists may signifi- cantly improve the quality of epidural analgesia compared with the s.c. route [159].

Intrathecal drug delivery
Spinal opioids work by binding to the mu receptor in the substan- tia gelatinosa and can be administered epidurally or by the i.t. route via percutaneous catheters, tunnelled catheters or implantable pro- grammable pumps (Figure 6). The i.t. route of analgesics delivery leads to decreased opioid consumption: if the opioid is delivered via the oral and epidural route, the doses are 300 [160] and 24
[161] times higher, respectively, than the same i.t. dose. Generally, this direct delivery to the i.t. space and the lower doses required lead to fewer systemic side effects and better analgesia. The i.t. route of opioid administration should be considered in patients experiencing pain in various locations: head and neck, upper and lower extremities and trunk, although it is more likely to be useful for pain below the diaphragm. The fully implanted systems offer less risk of infection and need lower maintenance than the
 

Somatic or neuropathic refractory pain




 
Life expectancy
< 6 months
 
Life expectancy
≥ 6 months
 



 
Epidural cathetera Percutaneous, tunnelled or with implantable system
 
i.t. cathetera Percutaneous, tunnelled or with implantable system
 

i.t. single shot triala	 	
 

 
Pain intensity decreases < 50%
 
Pain intensity decreases > 50%
 



 
No i.t. catheter
 
Trial with i.t. cathetera	 	
 


 

Pain intensity decreases < 50%
 

Pain intensity decreases > 50%
 



 

Reassessment by an interdisciplinary team
 


i.t. implantable pumpa
 

Figure 6. Management of refractory pain by i.t. drug delivery.
aChoice of drugs according to the type of pain. i.t., intrathecal.
 
percutaneous route, but the positioning is more complex [158]. These interventional strategies are not appropriate in patients with infections, coagulopathy or very short life expectancy. Many authors [158, 162] support the use of a trial of intraspinal analgesia using a temporary epidural or spinal catheter or even single shot bolus to determine efficacy before pump implantation. When compared with epidural, i.t. drug delivery presents fewer catheter problems, smaller drug dose requirement and fewer adverse effects. In addition, it gives better pain control and decreased risk of infec- tion. i.t. administration has the advantage of being less affected by the presence of extensive epidural metastasis and morphine, zico- notide and baclofen are the drugs most used, sometimes with local anaesthetics (bupivacaine 0.125%–0.25%) [163]. Limited evidence supports the use of subanaesthetic doses of ketamine, an NMDA antagonist, in intractable pain.
i.t. drug delivery or epidural administration of opioids may be useful in patients with:
(i)	inadequate pain relief despite systemic opioid escalating doses and appropriate adjuvant analgesia;
(ii)	non-effective response to switching the opioid or the route of administration, as well as when side effects increase be- cause of dose escalation; and
(iii)	life expectancy > 6 months justiﬁes the use of an implant-
able i.t. pump but only after a trial using a temporary epi- dural or spinal catheter or bolus dose of local anaesthetic and opioid [164].
Recommendation:
•	Intraspinal techniques delivered and monitored by a skilled team should be included as part of the cancer pain manage- ment strategy [II, B].

Peripheral nerve block
Peripheral nerve blocks or plexus blocks can be used when pain occurs in the field of one or more peripheral nerves, or if pain is caused by complications such as pathological fracture or vascular occlusion [164]. However, a peripheral nerve block as the princi- pal pain treatment is very rare, and they are always used together with systemic combined analgesia and in combination with the multimodal approach applied to all cancer pain. The use of neu- rolytic agents on peripheral nerves can lead to neuritis; therefore, for patients with good prognosis, this can result in symptoms more difficult to control than the original pain [165].

Neurolytic blockade
Neurolytic blocks should be limited to those patients with short life expectancy because they usually produce a block lasting 3– 6 months. These blocks can be used for the sympathetic system as well as for spinal neurolytic purposes for somatic pain. For the sympathetic system, neurolytic blocks should be considered as adjuvants to decrease the use of oral and/or parenteral analgesics because the visceral pain mechanisms are complex and change with progression of the disease. This technique is used for the su- perior hypogastric plexus block or ganglion impar block, when pel- vic pain or perineal pain of visceral origin is present, respectively. Spinal neurolytic blocks are very helpful and an inexpensive ‘one off’ means of helping pain which is localised to a few dermatomes and can be easily repeated if the effect is short-lasting [163].
 
Neurolysis of coeliac plexus
Coeliac plexus block (CPB) is useful when pain is of visceral aeti- ology only, and due to cancer in the upper abdomen or pancreas; it leads to pain control and, frequently, to a decrease in the total amount of systemic drugs and their side effects [166]. The tech- nique used to carry out CPB (anterior or posterior approach; amount and concentration of neurolytic agent and time) may af- fect the results and the duration of the analgesic effect. One new way to carry out this kind of CPB is represented by echo- endoscope guidance, placed in the stomach just below the cardia [167]. CPB should be carried out in the presence of visceral pain and only if the clinical condition of the patient is not poor. Previous studies have suggested that when there is evidence of dis- ease outside the pancreas, such as coeliac or portal adenopathy, or both, the success rate of this block decreases significantly [168].
Recommendation:
•	CPB appears to be safe and effective for the reduction of pain in patients with pancreatic cancer, with a signiﬁcant advan- tage over standard analgesic therapy until 6 months [II, B].

Spinal neurolytic blocks
Spinal neurolytic blocks are very helpful for focal pain in a small number of dermatomes. For example, it is useful in patients with perineal pain with pelvic cancer (e.g. recurrence of rectal cancer with local infiltration) or chest wall pain related to localised rib metastasis or referred abdominal pain from mesothelioma in a limited number of dermatomes, especially if the pain is one- sided. Spinal neurolytic blocks should also be considered for de- afferentation pain, such as that seen in peripheral nerve plexus tu- mour infiltration and destruction. Spinal neurolytic technique is a highly skilled pain intervention which has been described in various cancer pain management textbooks [169]. Neurolytic blocks are usually effective for 2–4 months and can be repeated in the event of recurrence of pain. Informed consent, explaining the side effects of this neuroablative technique including numbness or dysaesthesia, is a key when considering spinal neurolytic or any other neuroablative block. Epidural neurolytic blocks have been described in the literature; however, the benefit is limited and difficult to predict [170]. It may be applicable only to those patients in the terminal stages of cancer-related pain.

Spinal cord stimulation for cancer-related pain
Spinal cord stimulation is a well-established neuromodulation technique for chronic NP, for example, for failed back surgery syn- drome and complex regional pain syndrome. This treatment is rec- ommended by the United Kingdom (UK)’s National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) [171]. There has been sig- nificant improvement in the technology (hardware and the pro- gramming algorithm including electrical wave forms and frequency) and it is now applicable to alleviate severe NP of either malignant or non-malignant causes. For cancer-related pain, espe- cially if the cancer is slow growing, there is potential benefit from spinal cord stimulation if pain is difficult to control with pharma- cological options. It is now possible to carry out MRI scans if required, because of MRI-compatible spinal cord stimula- tion equipment. The concern with spinal cord stimulation in
 
cancer-related pain is related to the possible extension of the pain to other areas not covered by the stimulator and the possibility of neurological deficit. There are many published case series suggest- ing significant benefit, but a recent Cochrane systematic review suggested need for further high-quality studies in this field [172].
Spinal cord stimulation should be included as part of the overall pain management strategy, to be managed by a multidisciplinary team (MDT) with skill in this type of intervention. It is expected that it will be applicable in only a very small number of cases.

Cordotomy for cancer-related pain
Cordotomy for cancer-related pain has been described in the lit- erature from the early 1900s, initially as an open surgical tech- nique, but from the 1960s as a percutaneous technique. The technique has been further refined with the evolution of technol- ogy involving X-ray imaging facilities and radiofrequency machines, allowing a reliable heat lesion in the spinothalamic tract. High cervical cordotomy is effective for unilateral cancer- related pain below the C4 (fourth cervical) dermatomes, i.e. pain below the shoulder. The mesothelioma framework published in 2007 by the UK’s Department of Health [173] recommended availability of cervical cordotomy for mesothelioma-related chest wall pain, if otherwise uncontrolled with conventional medical management. Another good indication is incident pain (move- ment-related pain), for example related to pathological fractures in the long bone, pubic rami or pelvis related to local metastatic disease. Surgical treatment is often preferred for these fractures, but some patients have had surgical treatment including RT and still have ongoing intractable pain. This type of pain does not re- spond well to opioids, as patients have very little or no pain at rest. A systematic review published in 2014 confirmed a high suc- cess rate (80%) for patients in the early postoperative period [174]. However, no RCTs were included in this systematic review. This review advised setting up a national cordotomy registry that was set up in 2014 and now has more than 200 cases prospectively recorded post-cordotomy in the UK. The registry demonstrated the safety and efficacy of this technique, and the data should be published soon. There is also a prospective case series of 45 patients undergoing cordotomy at the authors’ institutes; 80% of
patients reported > 75% pain relief at 4-week follow-up [175].
Cordotomy should be offered in a MDT setting with palliative
medicine, oncology and pain medicine teams to support the care pathway. In the case of patients who are unable to tolerate percu- taneous cervical cordotomy because of the intractable nature of pain and the incapacity to lie supine in theatre, surgical cordot- omy remains an option. This is carried out by neurosurgeons and is likely to be helpful [176]. Cordotomy has very rarely been reported to help intractable pain unrelated to cancer in a termin- ally ill patient [177].
Recommendation:
•	Cordotomy should be available to patients with otherwise poorly controlled cancer-related pain [V, C].


 
Data suggest that 53%–70% of patients with cancer-related pain require an alternative route for opioid administration in the
 
months and hours before death [71]. On some occasions, as patients are nearing death, pain is perceived to be refractory. Pain is often accompanied by other symptoms such as dyspnoea, agita- tion, delirium and anxiety, any of which can exacerbate underly- ing central pain mechanisms.
A careful assessment of physical and non-physical suffering
underpins decisions about the most appropriate therapeutic intervention(s).
In deciding that pain is refractory, the clinician must, after care- ful assessment of physical pain and total suffering, perceive that the further application of standard interventions (including appropri- ate simple interventional techniques) as described above is either:
(i)	incapable of providing adequate relief;
(ii)	associated with excessive and intolerable acute or chronic morbidity; or
(iii)	unlikely to provide relief.
In this situation, sedation may be the only therapeutic option capable of providing adequate relief. The justification of sedation, which should be a rare intervention for pain, is that it is an appro- priate and proportionate goal.
However, before administering sedative drugs,  all possible
causes of suffering must be carefully assessed and evaluated by means of a multidisciplinary specialist approach which includes also psychiatric, psychological and pastoral care personnel.
Commonly used agents include opioids, neuroleptics, benzo-
diazepines, barbiturates and propofol. Irrespective of the agent or agents selected, administration initially requires dose titration to achieve adequate relief, followed subsequently by provision of ongoing therapy to ensure maintenance of effect. Patients should be monitored continuously for pain during the sedation process. If the team frequently uses sedation for pain relief, procedures should be reviewed to ensure that all other options are being con- sidered first. If sedation is used frequently by a team, then the team should review practices.
Pain that becomes generalised and/or escalates rapidly in the
existing location should be investigated immediately. Some patients with end-of-life pain have been misdiagnosed with hav- ing refractory or total pain, when in fact the pain has been induced by opioids, known as OIH [178].
OIH can be associated with a general sensitivity to a simple light touch as well as a marked increase in pre-existing pain. Patient history may reveal a recent, rapid titration of opioid and/ or a deterioration in organ function, particularly renal function, with a rapid accumulation of opioid toxic metabolites. Management of OIH is based on an opioid reduction and/or opi- oid switch and appropriate hydration [178].


 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines reviewed the published data and showed the lack of high-quality RCTs in the setting of cancer-related pain. This highlights the necessity for improved study design and a consensus approach to reporting of outcomes. Such improvements should lead to more robust evidence to de- termine appropriate level of evidence (LoE) and grade of recom- mendation (GoR).
 
Table 5. Summary of recommendations

Assessment
•	The intensity of pain and the treatment outcomes should be assessed regularly and consistently using the VAS or NRS and the worst pain question [V, D]
•	Observation of pain-related behaviours and discomfort is indicated in patients with cognitive impairment to assess the presence of pain [V, C]
•	The assessment of all components of suffering such as psychosocial distress should be considered and evaluated [II, B]

Principles of pain management
•	Patients should be informed about pain and pain management and should be encouraged to take an active role in their pain management [II, B]
•	The onset of pain should be prevented by means of ATC administration, taking into account the half-life, bioavailability and duration of action of different drugs [II, B]
•	Analgesics for chronic pain should be prescribed on a regular basis and not on an ‘as required’ schedule [V, D]
•	The oral route of administration of analgesic drugs should be advocated as the ﬁrst choice [IV, C]

Treatment of mild pain
•	Analgesic treatment should start with drugs indicated by the WHO analgesic ladder appropriate for the severity of pain [II, B]
•	There is no signiﬁcant evidence to support or refute the use of paracetamol alone or in combination with opioids for mild to moderate pain [I, C]
•	There is no signiﬁcant evidence to support or refute the use of NSAIDs alone or in combination with opioids for mild to moderate pain [I, C]

Treatment of mild to moderate pain
•	For mild to moderate pain, weak opioids such as tramadol, dihydrocodeine and codeine can be given in combination with non-opioid analgesics [III, C]
•	As an alternative to weak opioids, low doses of strong opioids could be an option but is not included in WHO guidance [II, C]
•	There is no evidence of increase in adverse effects from the use of low-dose strong opioids instead of the standard step 2 approach with weak opioids [II, C]

Treatment of moderate to severe pain
Strong opioids
•	The opioid of ﬁrst choice for moderate to severe cancer pain is oral morphine [I, A]
•	The average relative potency ratio of oral to i.v. morphine is between 1:2 and 1:3 [II, A]
•	The average relative potency ratio of oral to s.c. morphine is between 1:2 and 1:3 [IV, C]
•	Fentanyl and buprenorphine (via the t.d. or i.v. route) are the safest opioids in patients with chronic kidney disease stages 4 or 5 (estimated GFR < 30 mL/min) [III, B]
•	A different opioid should be considered in the absence of adequate analgesia (despite opioid dose escalation) or in the presence of unacceptable
opioid side effects [III, C]
•	The s.c. route is simple and effective for the administration of morphine, diamorphine and hydromorphone and it should be the ﬁrst-choice alternative route for patients unable to receive opioids by oral or t.d. route [III, B]
•	i.v. infusion should be considered when s.c. administration is contraindicated (peripheral oedema, coagulation disorders, poor peripheral circulation and need for high volumes and doses) [III, B]
•	i.v. administration is an option for opioid titration when rapid pain control is needed [III, B] Scheduling and titration
•	Individual titration, e.g. normal-release morphine administered every 4 h plus rescue doses (up to hourly) for BTcP, is recommended in clinical practice [IV, C]
•	Immediate and slow-release oral morphine formulations can be used to titrate the dose. Titration schemes for both types of formulation should be supplemented with immediate-release oral opioids, prescribed as required for BTcP [III, B]
•	The regular dose of slow-release opioids can be adjusted to take into account the total amount of rescue morphine [IV, C] Management of opioid side effects
•	Laxatives must be routinely prescribed for both the prophylaxis and the management of OIC [I, A]
•	The use of naloxone (in association with oxycodone) or methylnaltrexone to control OIC may be considered [II, B]
•	Naloxegol has been shown to be highly effective in OIC [II, B], but, to date, there is no speciﬁc reported experience in the cancer population
•	Metoclopramide and antidopaminergic drugs should be recommended for treatment of opioid-related nausea/vomiting [III, B]
•	Psychostimulants (e.g. methylphenidate) to treat opioid-induced sedation are only advised when other methods to treat this have been tried (e.g. if it is not possible to rationalise all medication with a sedative side effect) [II, B]
•	Mu receptor antagonists (e.g. naloxone) must be used promptly in the treatment of opioid-induced respiratory depression [I, B]

Continued
 
Table 5. Continued

BTcP
•	Immediate-release opioids should be used to treat BTcP that is opioid-responsive and for which background cancer pain management has been optimised [I, A]
•	Transmucosal fentanyl formulations (oral, buccal, sublingual and intranasal) have a role in unpredictable and rapid-onset BTcP [I, A]
•	There are indications for standard normal-release oral opioids (e.g. morphine) that include a slow-onset BTcP or a pre-emptive administration of oral opioids ~30 minutes before a predictable BTcP triggered by known events [II, B]
Bone pain
EBRT
•	All patients with painful bone metastases should be offered EBRT and the prescription should be 8 Gy single dose [I, A]
•	Patients with recurrent bone pain after previous irradiation should be offered re-irradiation with a further dose of 8 Gy [I, A]
•	SBRT should be considered for patients with oligometastases having good performance status and well-controlled primary sites, preferably within clinical trials [V, D]
mSCC
•	Early diagnosis and prompt therapy are powerful predictors of outcome in mSCC [I, A]
•	The majority of patients with mSCC should receive RT alone but surgery should be considered for selected cases [II, B]
•	HFRT regimens, including a single dose of 8 Gy, can be considered the schedule of choice [I, A] while more protracted RT regimens may be used in selected mSCC patients with a predicted longer life expectancy [I, B]
•	Dexamethasone should be prescribed in patients with mSCC [II, A] in a dose of 8–16 mg daily [III, B]
Targeted therapy and bone pain
•	In castrate-resistant prostate cancer patients, radium-223 is effective in reducing SREs, decreasing pain and improving survival [I, A]
•	Radioisotope therapy with strontium, samarium or rhenium can be effective in some cases but may cause bone marrow toxicity [II, C]
•	BPs may be considered as part of the therapeutic regimen for the treatment of patients with bone metastases in patients with a good prognosis [II, C]
•	BPs should be considered especially when pain is not localised or RT is not readily accessible [II, C]
•	Preventive dental measures are necessary before starting BP administration [III, A]
•	Denosumab is indicated as an alternative to BPs for the treatment of patients with metastatic bone disease from solid tumours and myeloma [I, A]
•	Denosumab is effective in delaying bone pain recurrence [II, C]
•	Preventive dental measures are necessary before starting denosumab administration [III, A]

Cancer-related NP
•	Cancer-related NP can be treated using opioid combination therapies and carefully dosed adjuvants, when opioids alone provide insufﬁcient pain relief [II, B]
•	Patients with NP should be given either a TCA or an anticonvulsant and be monitored for side effects [I, A]
•	Gabapentin, pregabalin, duloxetine and TCA (doses ≤ 75 mg/day) are strongly recommended as single agents for NP ﬁrst-line treatment [I, A]
•	Interventional treatments of NP are based on weak or inconclusive evidence and should be restricted to patients with NP syndromes other than those related to cancer [II, C]
•	There is a lack of evidence to support the routine use of ketamine in cancer NP [II, D]

Invasive management of refractory pain
•	Intraspinal techniques delivered and monitored by a skilled team should be included as part of the cancer pain management strategy [II, B]
•	CPB appears to be safe and effective for the reduction of pain in patients with pancreatic cancer, with a signiﬁcant advantage over standard analgesic therapy until 6 months [II, B]
•	Cordotomy should be available to patients with otherwise poorly controlled cancer-related pain [V, C]

ATC, around-the-clock; BP, bisphosphonate; BTcP, breakthrough cancer pain; CPB, coeliac plexus block; EBRT, external beam radiotherapy; GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate; HFRT, hypofractionated radiotherapy; i.v., intravenous; mSCC, metastatic spinal cord compression; NP, neuropathic pain; NRS, numerical rating scale; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug; OIC, opioid-induced constipation; RT, radiotherapy; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; s.c., subcutane- ous; SRE, skeletal-related event; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant; t.d., transdermal; VAS, visual analogue scale; WHO, World Health Organization.





 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accord- ance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development http://www.esmo.org/ Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The relevant litera- ture has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of
 
recommendations is provided in Table 5. LoE and GoR have been applied using the system shown in Table 6. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty. This manuscript has been sub- jected to an anonymous peer review process.
 

 

 

 
 
The authors thank Emanuela Dell’Aquila for her help with the graphic representation of the tables and figures.


 
The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.

 
1.	Portenoy RK. Treatment of cancer pain. Lancet 2011; 377: 2236–2247.
2.	van den Beuken-van Everdingen MH, de Rijke JM, Kessels AG et al. Prevalence of pain in patients with cancer: a systematic review of the past 40 years. Ann Oncol 2007; 18: 1437–1449.
3.	Burton AW, Fanciullo GJ, Beasley RD et al. Chronic pain in cancer sur-
vivor: a new frontier. Pain Med 2007; 8: 189–198.
4.	Glare PA, Pamela S, Davies PS et al. Pain in cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 1739–1747.
5.	Brown MDR, Juan D, Ramirez JD, Paul Farquhar-Smith P. Pain in can- cer survivors. Br J Pain 2014; 8: 139–153.
6.	Breivik H, Cherny N, Collett F et al. Cancer-related pain: a pan-
European survey of prevalence, treatment, and patient attitudes. Ann Oncol 2009; 20: 1420–1433.
7.	Greco MT, Roberto A, Corli O et al. Quality of cancer pain manage-
ment: an update of a systematic review of undertreatment of patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 4149–4154.
8.	Cleeland CS, Gonin R, Hatfield AK et al. Pain and its treatment in out- patients with metastatic cancer. N Engl J Med 1994; 330: 592–596.
9.	Bandieri E, Sichetti D, Luppi M et al. Is pain in patients with haemato-
logical malignancies under-recognised? The results from Italian ECAD- O survey. Leuk Res 2010; 34: e334–e335.
10.	Torre LA, Bray F, Siegel RL et al. Global cancer statistics, 2012. CA
Cancer J Clin 2015; 65: 87–108.
11.	Frankish H. 15 million new cancer cases per year by 2020, says WHO. Lancet 2003; 361: 1278.
12.	Caraceni A, Cherny N, Fainsinger R et al. Pain measurement tools and
methods in clinical research in palliative care: recommendations of an expert working group of the European Association of Palliative Care. J Pain Symptom Manage 2002; 23: 239–255.
 
13.	Sun V, Borneman T, Piper B et al. Barriers to pain assessment and man- agement in cancer survivorship. J Cancer Surviv 2008; 2: 65–71.
14.	Portenoy RK, Koh M, Cancer pain syndromes. In E Bruera, RK Portenoy (eds), Cancer Pain. Assessment and Management, vol. 4. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2010; 53–88.
15.	Fallon M, Walker J, Colvin L et al. Pain management in cancer center inpatients: a cluster randomized trial to evaluate a systematic integrated approach-the Edinburgh pain assessment and management tool. J Clin Oncol 2018; 36: 1284–1290.
16.	van Herk R, van Dijk M, Baar FPM et al. Observational scales for pain assessment in older adults with cognitive impairments or communica- tion difficulties. Nurs Res 2007; 56: 34–43.
17.	Lichtner V, Dowding D, Esterhuizen P et al. Pain assessment for people with dementia: a systematic review of systematic reviews of pain assess- ment tools. BMC Geriatr 2014; 14: 138.
18.	World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines on the Pharmacological Treatment of Persisting Pain in Children with Medical Illnesses, 2012. www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/guide_perspainchild/en/ (11 April 2018, date last accessed).
19.	Syrjala KL, Jensen MP, Mendoza ME et al. Psychological and behav- ioural approaches to cancer pain management. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 1703–1711.
20.	Tracey I. Neuroimaging mechanisms in pain: from discovery to transla- tion. Pain 2017; 158: S115–S122.
21.	Reid CM, Gooberman-Hill R, Hanks GW. Opioid analgesics for cancer pain: symptom control for the living or comfort for the dying? A quali- tative study to investigate the factors influencing the decision to accept morphine for pain caused by cancer. Ann Oncol 2008; 19: 44–48.
22.	Bennett MI, Bagnall AM, Jose´ Closs S. How effective are patient-based educational interventions in the management of cancer pain? Systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain 2009; 143: 192–199.
23.	Sheinfeld Gorin S, Krebs P, Badr H et al. Meta-analysis of psychosocial interventions to reduce pain in patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 539–547.
24.	World Health Organization. Cancer Pain Relief, 2nd edn. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1996.
25.	Hanks GW, De Conno F, Ripamonti C et al. Morphine in cancer pain: modes of administration. BMJ 1996; 312: 823–826.
26.	Portenoy RK, Hagen NA. Breakthrough pain: definition, prevalence, and characteristics. Pain 1990; 41: 273–281.
27.	Bandieri E, Romero M, Ripamonti C et al. Randomized trial of low- dose morphine versus weak opioids in moderate cancer pain. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 436–442.
 
28.	Fallon M, Do We Need Step 2 of the WHO Pain Ladder—An EAPC Research Network Study. EAPC Abstract Book. Madrid: EAPC 2017; PS05; 36.
29.	Paice JA, Ferrell B. The management of cancer pain. CA Cancer J Clin 2011; 61: 157–182.
30.	Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA et al. Oral paracetamol (acetaminophen) for cancer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 7: CD012637.
31.	Derry S, Wiffen PJ, Moore R et al. Oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for cancer pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 12: CD012638.
32.	British National Formulary. BNF 75 March–September 2018, 75th edi- tion. London: British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain 2018.
33.	European Medicines Agency. Public statement: European Medicines Agency Announces Regulatory Action on COX-2 Inhibitors (EMEA/ 62838/2005). www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Public_ statement/2009/11/WC500014818.pdf (11 April 2018, date last accessed).
34.	Gaertner J, Stamer UM, Remi C et al. Metamizole/dipyrone for the re- lief of cancer pain: a systematic review and evidence-based recommen- dations for clinical practice. Palliat Med 2017; 31: 26–34.
35.	Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA. Tramadol with or without paracetamol (acetaminophen) for cancer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 5: CD012508.
36.	World Health Organization. WHO Model List of Essential Medicines: 20th WHO Essential Medicines List (EML), March 2017. www.who.int/ medicines/publications/essentialmedicines/en/ (11 April 2018, date last accessed).
37.	Rodriguez RF, Bravo LE, Castro F et al. Incidence of weak opioids ad- verse events in the management of cancer pain: a double-blind com- parative trial. J Palliat Med 2007; 10: 56–60.
38.	Eisenberg E, Berkey C, Carr DB et al. Efficacy and safety of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs for cancer pain: a meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 1994; 12: 2756–2765.
39.	Management of cancer pain evidence report technology assessment: number 35–management of cancer pain summary. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother 2002; 16: 91–102.
40.	Straube C, Derry S, Jackson KC et al. Codeine, alone and with paraceta- mol (acetaminophen), for cancer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 9: CD006601.
41.	Larkin PJ, Cherny NI, La Carpia D et al. Diagnosis, assessment and management of constipation in advanced cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. Annal Oncol 2018; 29(Suppl 4): iv94–iv108.
42.	Ventafridda V, Tamburini M, Caraceni A et al. A validation study of the WHO method for cancer pain relief. Cancer 1987; 59: 850–856.
43.	Manjiani D, Paul DB, Kunnumpurath S et al. Availability and utiliza- tion of opioids for pain management: global issues. Ochsner J 2014; 14: 208–215.
44.	Duthey B, Scholten W. Adequacy of opioid analgesic consumption at country, global, and regional levels in 2010, its relationship with devel- opment level, and changes compared with 2006. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 47: 283–297.
45.	Berterame S, Erthal J, Thomas J et al. Use of and barriers to access to opioid analgesics: a worldwide, regional, and national study. Lancet 2016; 387: 1644–1656.
46.	Knaul FM, Farmer PE, Krakauer EL et al. Alleviating the access abyss in palliative care and pain relief-an imperative of universal health cover- age: the Lancet Commission report. Lancet 2018; 391: 1391–1454.
47.	World Health Organization. Ensuring balance in national policies on controlled substances, 2011. www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_ safety/guide_nocp_sanend/en/ (11 April 2018, date last accessed).
48.	Cherny NI, Baselga J, de Conno F, Radbruch L. Formulary availability and regulatory barriers to accessibility of opioids for cancer pain in Europe: a report from the ESMO/EAPC Opioid Policy Initiative. Ann Oncol 2010; 21: 615–626.
49.	Bandieri E, Chiarolanza A, Luppi M et al. Prescription of opioids in Italy: everything, but the morphine. Ann Oncol 2009; 20: 961–962.
 
50.	Wiffen PJ, Wee B, Moore RA. Oral morphine for cancer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; 4: CD003868.
51.	Wiffen PJ, Wee B, Derry S et al. Opioids for cancer pain—an overview of Cochrane reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 7: CD012592.
52.	Kaiko RF. The therapeutic equivalence of i.m. and p.o. administration of morphine–1: 3 or 1:6? J Palliat Care 1988; 4: 64–66.
53.	Sande TA, Laird BJ, Fallon MT. The use of opioids in cancer patients with renal impairment—a systematic review. Support Care Cancer 2017; 25: 661–675.
54.	Schmidt-Hansen M, Bennett MI, Arnold S et al. Oxycodone for cancer- related pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 2: CD003870.
55.	Gourlay GK. Treatment of cancer pain with transdermal fentanyl. Lancet Oncol 2001; 2: 165–172.
56.	Hadley G, Derry S, Moore RA, Wiffen PJ. Transdermal fentanyl for can- cer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 10: CD010270.
57.	King S, Forbes K, Hanks GW et al. A systematic review of the use of opi- oid medication for those with moderate to severe cancer pain and renal impairment: a European Palliative Care Research Collaborative opioid guidelines project. Palliat Med 2011; 25: 525–552.
58.	Good P, Afsharimani B, Movva R et al. Therapeutic challenges in cancer pain management: a systematic review of methadone. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother 2014; 28: 197–205.
59.	Taberna  M,  Villavicencio-Cha´vez  C,  Gonza´lez-Barboteo  J.  [Use  of methadone in the elderly with cancer pain: a systematic review]. Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol 2014; 49: 129–136 [Article in Spanish].
60.	Haumann J, Geurts JW, van Kuijk SM et al. Methadone is superior to fentanyl in treating neuropathic pain in patients with head-and-neck cancer. Eur J Cancer 2016; 65: 121–129.
61.	Ripamonti C, Groff L, Brunelli C et al. Switching from morphine to oral methadone in treating cancer pain: what is the equianalgesic dose ratio? J Clin Oncol 1998; 16: 3216–3221.
62.	Mercadante S, Casuccio A, Calderone L. Rapid switching from mor- phine to methadone in cancer patients with poor response to morphine. J Clin Oncol 1999; 17: 3307–3312.
63.	Mercadante S, Portenoy RK. Opioid poorly-responsive cancer pain. Part 3. Clinical strategies to improve opioid responsiveness. J Pain Symptom Manage 2001; 21: 338–338.
64.	Cherny N, Ripamonti C, Pereira J, Expert working group of the European association of palliative care network et al. Strategies to man- age the adverse effects of oral morphine: an evidence-based report. J Clin Oncol 2001; 19: 2542–2554.
65.	Mercadante S. Opioid rotation for cancer pain: rationale and clinical aspects. Cancer 1999; 86: 1856–1866.
66.	Mercadante S, Bruera E. Opioid switching in cancer pain: from the be- ginning to nowadays. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2016; 99: 241–248.
67.	Mercadante S, Caraceni A. Conversion ratios for opioid switching in the treatment of cancer pain: a systematic review. Palliat Med 2011; 25: 504–515.
68.	Caraceni A, Hanks G, Kaasa S et al. Use of opioid analgesics in the treat-
ment of cancer pain: evidence-based recommendations from the EAPC. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: e58–e68.
69.	Bruera E, Belzile M, Pituskin E et al. Randomized, double-blind, cross- over trial comparing safety and efficacy of oral controlled-release oxy- codone with controlled-release morphine in patients with cancer pain. J Clin Oncol 1998; 16: 3222–3229.
70.	Heiskanen T, Kalso E. Controlled-release oxycodone and morphine in cancer related pain. Pain 1997; 73: 37–45.
71.	Kalso E, Vainio A. Morphine and oxycodone hydrochloride in the man- agement of cancer pain. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1990; 47: 639–646.
72.	Lauretti GR, Oliveira GM, Pereira NL. Comparison of sustained-release morphine with sustained-release oxycodone in advanced cancer patients. Br J Cancer 2003; 89: 2027–2030.
73.	Riley J, Ross JR, Rutter D et al. No pain relief from morphine?
Individual variation in sensitivity to morphine and the need to switch to. Support Care Cancer 2006; 14: 56–64.
74.	Narabayashi M, Saijo Y, Takenoshita S et al. Opioid rotation from oral morphine to oral oxycodone in cancer patients with intolerable adverse effects: an open-label trial. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2008; 38: 296–304.
 
75.	Hagen NA, Babul N. Comparative clinical efficacy and safety of a novel controlled-release oxycodone formulation and controlled-release hydromorphone in the treatment of cancer pain. Cancer 1997; 79: 1428–1437.
76.	Mercadante S, Casuccio A, Tirelli W, Giarratano A. Equipotent doses to switch from high doses of opioids to transdermal buprenorphine. Support Care Cancer 2009; 17: 715–718.
77.	Donner B, Zenz M, Tryba M, Strumpf M. Direct conversion from oral morphine to transdermal fentanyl: a multicenter study in patients with cancer pain. Pain 1996; 64: 527–534.
78.	McNamara P. Opioid switching from morphine to transdermal fentanyl for toxicity reduction in palliative care. Palliat Med 2002; 16: 425–434.
79.	Mystakidou K, Tsilika E, Parpa E et al. Long-term cancer pain manage- ment in morphine pre-treated and opioid naive patients with transder- mal fentanyl. Int J Cancer 2003; 107: 486–492.
80.	Mercadante S, Ferrera P, Villari P et al. Frequency, indications, out- comes, and predictive factors of opioid switching in an acute palliative care unit. J Pain Symptom Manage 2009; 37: 632–641.
81.	Mercadante S, Casuccio A, Fulfaro F et al. Switching from morphine to methadone to improve analgesia and tolerability in cancer patients: a prospective study. J Clin Oncol 2001; 19: 2898–2904.
82.	Mercadante S, Bianchi M, Villari P et al. Opioid plasma concentration during switching from morphine to methadone: preliminary data. Support Care Cancer 2003; 11: 326–331.
83.	Tse DM, Sham MM, Ng DK, Ma HM. An ad libitum schedule for con- version of morphine to methadone in advanced cancer patients: an open uncontrolled prospective study in a Chinese population. Palliat Med 2003; 17: 206–211.
84.	Moriarty M, McDonald CJ, Miller AJ. A randomized crossover compari- son of controlled release hydromorphone tablets with controlled release morphine tablets in patients with cancer pain. J Clin Res 1999; 2: 1–8.
85.	Radbruch L, Trottenberg P, Elsner F et al. Systematic review of the role of alternative application routes for opioid treatment for moderate to severe cancer pain: an EPCRC opioid guidelines project. Palliat Med 2011; 25: 578–596.
86.	Klepstad P, Kaasa S, Borchgrevink PC. Starting step III opioids for moderate to severe pain in cancer patients: dose titration: a systematic review. Palliat Med 2011; 25: 424–430.
87.	Mercadante S, Villari P, Ferrera P et al. Rapid titration with intravenous morphine for severe cancer pain and immediate oral conversion. Cancer 2002; 95: 203–208.
88.	Harris JT, Suresh Kumar K, Rajagopal MR. Intravenous morphine for rapid control of severe cancer pain. Palliat Med 2003; 17: 248–256.
89.	Klepstad P, Kaasa S, Jystad A et al. Immediate- or sustained-release morphine for dose finding during start of morphine to cancer patients: a randomized, double-blind trial. Pain 2003; 101: 193–198.
90.	Benyamin R, Trescot AM, Datta S et al. Opioid complications and side effects. Pain Physician 2008; 11(2 Suppl): S105–S120.
91.	Stone P, Minton O. European Palliative Care Research collaborative pain guidelines. Central side-effects management: what is the evidence to support best practice in the management of sedation, cognitive im- pairment and myoclonus? Palliat Med 2011; 25: 431–441.
92.	Bush SH, Lawlor PG, Ryan K et al. Delirium in adult cancer patients: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. Ann Oncol 2018; 29(Suppl 4): iv143–iv165.
93.	Walsh D, Davis M, Ripamonti C et al. 2016 updated MASCC/ESMO
consensus recommendations: management of nausea and vomiting in advanced cancer. Support Care Cancer 2017; 25: 333–340.
94.	Kumar L, Barker C, Emmanuel A. Opioid-induced constipation: patho- physiology, clinical consequences, and management. Gastroenterol Res Pract 2014; 2014: 141737.
95.	Candy B, Jones L, Goodman ML et al. Laxatives or methylnaltrexone
for the management of constipation in palliative care patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 1: CD003448.
96.	Chey WD, Webster L, Sostek M et al. Naloxegol for opioid-induced constipation in patients with noncancer pain. N Engl J Med 2014; 370: 2387–2396.
 
97.	Katakami N, Harada T, Murata T et al. Randomized phase III and ex- tension studies of naldemedine in patients with opioid-induced consti- pation and cancer. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35: 3859–3866.
98.	Meissner W, Leyendecker P, Mueller-Lissner S et al. A randomised con- trolled trial with prolonged-release oral oxycodone and naloxone to prevent and reverse opioid-induced constipation. Eur J Pain 2009; 13: 56–64.
99.	Morlion BJ, Mueller-Lissner SA, Vellucci R et al. Oral prolonged-release oxycodone/naloxone for managing pain and opioid-induced constipa- tion: a review of the evidence. Pain Pract 2018; 18: 647–665.
100.	Ahmedzai SH, Leppert W, Janecki M et al. Long-term safety and efficacy of oxycodone/naloxone prolonged-release tablets in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic cancer pain. Support Care Cancer 2015; 23: 823–830.
101.	Amato F, Ceniti S, Mameli S et al. High dosage of a fixed combination oxycodone/naloxone prolonged release: efficacy and tolerability in patients with chronic cancer pain. Support Care Cancer 2017; 25: 3051–3058.
102.	Clemens KE, Quednau I, Klaschik E. Bowel function during pain ther- apy with oxycodone/naloxone prolonged-release tablets in patients with advanced cancer. Int J Clin Pract 2011; 65: 472–478.
103.	Cuomo A, Russo G, Esposito G et al. Efficacy and gastrointestinal toler- ability of oral oxycodone/naloxone combination for chronic pain in outpatients with cancer: an observational study. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2014; 31: 867–876.
104.	De Santis S, Borghesi C, Ricciardi S et al. Analgesic effectiveness and tol- erability of oral oxycodone/naloxone and pregabalin in patients with lung cancer and neuropathic pain: an observational analysis. Onco Targets Ther 2016; 9: 4043–4052.
105.	Dupoiron D, Stachowiak A, Loewenstein O et al. A phase III random- ized controlled study on the efficacy and improved bowel function of prolonged-release (PR) oxycodone-naloxone (up to 160/80 mg daily) vs oxycodone PR. Eur J Pain 2017; 21: 1528–1537.
106.	Dupoiron D, Stachowiak A, Loewenstein O et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of oxycodone-naloxone prolonged-release formulation (up to 180/90 mg daily)—results of the open-label extension phase of a phase III multicenter, multiple-dose, randomized, controlled study. Eur J Pain 2017; 21: 1485–1494.
107.	Lazzari M, Greco MT, Marcassa C et al. Efficacy and tolerability of oral oxycodone and oxycodone/naloxone combination in opioid-naive can- cer patients: a propensity analysis. Drug Des Devel Ther 2015; 9: 5863–5872.
108.	Johnson JR, Burnell-Nugent M, Lossignol D et al. Multicenter, double- blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of the effi- cacy, safety, and tolerability of THC: cBD extract and THC extract in patients with intractable cancer-related pain. J Pain Symptom Manage 2010; 39; : 167–179.
109.	Johnson JR, Lossignol D, Burnell-Nugent M et al. An open-label exten-
sion study to investigate the long-term safety and tolerability of THC/ CBD oromucosal spray and oromucosal THC spray in patients with ter- minal cancer-related pain refractory to strong opioid analgesics. J Pain Symptom Manage 2013; 46: 207–218.
110.	Portenoy RK, Ganae-Motan ED, Allende S et al. Nabiximols for opioid- treated cancer patients with poorly-controlled chronic pain: a random- ized, placebo-controlled, graded-dose trial. J Pain 2012; 13: 438–449.
111.	Fallon MT, Albert Lux E, McQuade R et al. Sativex oromucosal spray as adjunctive therapy in advanced cancer patients with chronic pain un- alleviated by optimized opioid therapy: two double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled phase 3 studies. Br J Pain 2017; 11: 119–133.
112.	Lichtman AH, Lux EA, McQuade R et al. Results of a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of nabiximols oromucosal spray as an adjunctive therapy in advanced cancer patients with chronic un- controlled pain. J Pain Symptom Manage 2018; 55: 179–188.e1.
113.	Løhre ET, Klepstad P, Bennett MI et al. From “breakthrough” to “episodic” cancer pain? A European association for palliative care re- search network expert Delphi survey toward a common terminology
 
and classification of transient cancer pain exacerbations. J Pain Symptom Manage 2016; 51: 1013–1019.
114.	Deandrea S, Corli O, Consonni D et al. Prevalence of breakthrough can- cer pain: a systematic review and a pooled analysis of published litera- ture. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 47: 57–76.
115.	Webber K, Davies AN, Zeppetella G, Cowie MR. Development and val- idation of the breakthrough pain assessment tool (BAT) in cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 48: 619–631.
116.	Davies AN, Dickman A, Reid C et al. The management of cancer- related breakthrough pain: recommendations of a task group of the Science Committee of the Association for Palliative Medicine of Great Britain and Ireland. Eur J Pain 2009; 13: 331–338.
117.	Shimoyama N, Gomyo I, Katakami N et al. Efficacy and safety of sublin- gual fentanyl orally disintegrating tablet at doses determined by titra- tion for the treatment of breakthrough pain in Japanese cancer patients: a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind phase III trial. Int J Clin Oncol 2015; 20: 198–206.
118.	Rauck R, Reynolds L, Geach J et al. Efficacy and safety of fentanyl sub- lingual spray for the treatment of breakthrough cancer pain: a random- ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Curr Med Res Opin 2012; 28: 859–870.
119.	Jandhyala R, Fullarton JR, Bennett MI. Efficacy of rapid-onset oral fen- tanyl formulations vs. oral morphine for cancer-related breakthrough pain: a meta-analysis of comparative trials. J Pain Symptom Manage 2013; 46: 573–580.
120.	Zeppetella G, Davies A, Eijgelshoven I, Jansen JP. A network meta- analysis of the efficacy of opioid analgesics for the management of breakthrough cancer pain episodes. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 47: 772–785.e5.
121.	Mercadante S. Fentanyl buccal tablet for the treatment of cancer-related breakthrough pain. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 2015; 8: 9–13.
122.	Rogr´ıguez D, Urrutia G, Escobar Y et al. Efficacy and safety of oral or nasal fentanyl for treatment of breakthrough pain in cancer patients: a systematic review. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother 2015; 29: 228–246.
123.	Mercadante S. Pharmacotherapy for breakthrough cancer pain. Drugs 2012; 72: 181–190.
124.	Mercadante S, Adile C, Cuomo A et al. Fentanyl buccal tablet vs. oral morphine in doses proportional to the basal opioid regimen for the management of breakthrough cancer pain: a randomized, crossover, comparison study. J Pain Symptom Manage 2015; 50: 579–586.
125.	Mercadante S, Aielli F, Adile C et al. Fentanyl pectin nasal spray versus oral morphine in doses proportional to the basal opioid regimen for the management of breakthrough cancer pain: a comparative study. J Pain Symptom Manage 2016; 52: 27–34.
126.	Zecca E, Brunelli C, Centurioni F et al. Fentanyl sublingual tablets ver- sus subcutaneous morphine for the management of severe cancer pain episodes in patients receiving opioid treatment: a double-blind, randomized, noninferiority trial. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35: 759–765.
127.	Lutz S, Balboni T, Jones J et al. Palliative radiation therapy for bone metastases: update of an ASTRO evidence-based guideline. Pract Radiat Oncol 2017; 7: 4–12.
128.	Chow R, Hoskin P, Hollenberg D et al. Efficacy of single fraction conven- tional radiation therapy for painful uncomplicated bone metastases: a sys- tematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Palliat Med 2017; 6: 125–142.
129.	Lutz S, Berk L, Chang E et al. Palliative radiotherapy for bone metasta- ses: an ASTRO evidence-based guideline. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2011; 79: 965–976.
130.	van den Hout WB, van der Linden YM, Steenland E et al. Single- versus multiple-fraction radiotherapy in patients with painful bone metastases: cost-utility analysis based on a randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 2003; 95: 222–229.
131.	Chow E, van der Linden YM, Roos D et al. Single versus multiple frac- tions of repeat radiation for painful bone metastases: a randomised, controlled, non-inferiority trial. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 164–171.
132.	Bhattacharya IS, Hoskin PJ. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for spinal and bone metastases. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 2015; 27: 298–306.
 
133.	Maranzano E, Bellavita R, Rossi R et al. Short-course versus split-course radiotherapy in metastatic spinal cord compression: results of a phase III, randomized, multicenter trial. J Clin Oncol 2005; 23: 3358–3365.
134.	Loblaw DA, Mitera G, Ford M, Laperriere NJ. A 2011 updated systemat- ic review and clinical practice guideline for the management of malig- nant extradural spinal cord compression. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2012; 84: 312–317.
135.	Rades  D,  ˇSegedin  B,  Conde-Moreno  AJ  et  al.  Radiotherapy  with
4 Gy×5 versus 3 Gy×10 for metastatic epidural spinal cord compres- sion: final results of the SCORE-2 Trial (ARO 2009/01). J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 597–602.
136.	Rades D, Panzner A, Rudat V et al. Dose escalation of radiotherapy for metastatic spinal cord compression (MSCC) in patients with relatively favorable survival prognosis. Strahlenther Onkol 2011; 187: 729–735.
137.	Hoskin P, Misra V, Hopkins K et al. SCORAD III: randomized nonin- feriority phase III trial of single-dose radiotherapy (RT) compared to multifraction RT in patients (pts) with metastatic spinal canal compres- sion (SCC). J Clin Oncol 2017; 35(18_Suppl): LBA10004.
138.	Roque´ I, Figuls M, Martinez-Zapata MJ, Scott-Brown M, Alonso- Coello P. Withdrawn: radioisotopes for metastatic bone pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 3: CD003347.
139.	Sartor O, Coleman R, Nilsson S et al. Effect of radium-223 dichloride on symptomatic skeletal events in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer and bone metastases: results from a phase 3, double- blind, randomised trial. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 738–746.
140.	Porta-Sales J, Garzo´n-Rodr´ıguez C, Llorens-Torrome´  S et al. Evidence on the analgesic role of bisphosphonates and denosumab in the treat- ment of pain due to bone metastases: a systematic review within the European Association for Palliative Care guidelines project. Palliat Med 2017; 31: 5–25.
141.	Hoskin P, Sundar S, Reczko K et al. A multicenter randomized trial of ibandronate compared with single-dose radiotherapy for localized metastatic bone pain in prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2015; 107, pii: djv197.
142.	Ripamonti CI, Maniezzo M, Campa T et al. Decreased occurrence of osteonecrosis of the jaw after implementation of dental preventive measures in solid tumour patients with bone metastases treated with bisphosphonates. The experience of the National Cancer Institute of Milan. Ann Oncol 2009; 20: 137–145.
143.	Stopeck AT, Lipton A, Body JJ et al. Denosumab compared with zole- dronic acid for the treatment of bone metastases in patients with advanced breast cancer: a randomized, double-blind study. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 5132–5139.
144.	Fizazi K, Carducci M, Smith M et al. Denosumab versus zoledronic acid for treatment of bone metastases in men with castration-resistant pros- tate cancer: a randomised, double-blind study. Lancet 2011; 377: 813–822.
145.	von Moos R, Body JJ, Egerdie B et al. Pain and health-related quality of life in patients with advanced solid tumours and bone metastases: inte- grated results from three randomized, double-blind studies of denosu- mab and zoledronic acid. Support Care Cancer 2013; 21: 3497–3507.
146.	Van Poznak CH, Von Roenn JH, Temin S. American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update: recommendations on the role of bone-modifying agents in metastatic breast cancer. J Oncol Pract 2011; 7: 117–121.
147.	Mulvey MR, Rolke R, Klepstad P et al. Confirming neuropathic pain in cancer patients: applying the NeuPSIG grading system in clinical prac- tice and clinical research. Pain 2014; 155: 859–863.
148.	Bennett MI, Rayment C, Hjermstad M et al. Prevalence and aetiology of neuropathic pain in cancer patients: a systematic review. Pain 2012; 153: 359–365.
149.	Treede RD, Jensen TS, Campbell JN et al. Neuropathic pain: redefin- ition and a grading system for clinical and research purposes. Neurology 2008; 70: 1630–1635.
150.	Bennett MI, Laird B, van Litsenburg C, Nimour M. Pregabalin for the management of neuropathic pain in adults with cancer: a systematic re- view of the literature. Pain Med 2013; 14: 1681–1688.
 
151.	Finnerup NB, Attal N, Haroutounian S et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol 2015; 14: 162–173.
152.	Kane CM, Mulvey MR, Wright S et al. Opioids combined with antide- pressants or antiepileptic drugs for cancer pain: systematic review and meta-analysis. Palliat Med 2018; 32: 276–286.
153.	van den Beuken-van Everdingen MH, de Graeff A, Jongen JL et al. Pharmacological treatment of pain in cancer patients: the role of adju- vant analgesics, a systematic review. Pain Pract 2017; 17: 409–419.
154.	Bennett MI. Effectiveness of antiepileptic or antidepressant drugs when added to opioids for cancer pain: systematic review. Palliat Med 2011; 25: 553–559.
155.	Dworkin RH, O’Connor AB, Kent J et al. Interventional management of neuropathic pain: neuPSIG recommendations. Pain 2013; 154: 2249–2261.
156.	Bell RF, Eccleston C, Kalso EA. Ketamine as an adjuvant to opioids for cancer pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 6: CD003351.
157.	Fallon MT, Wilcock A, Kelly CA et al. Oral ketamine vs placebo in patients with cancer-related neuropathic pain: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Oncol 2018; [Epub ahead of print].
158.	Vainio A, Tigerstedt I. Opioid treatment for radiating cancer pain: oral administration vs. epidural techniques. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1988; 32: 179–185.
159.	Kalso E, Heiskanen T, Rantio M et al. Epidural and subcutaneous mor- phine in the management of cancer pain: a double-blind cross-over study. Pain 1996; 67: 443–449.
160.	Lamer TJ. Treatment of cancer-related pain: when orally administered medications fail. Mayo Clin Proc 1994; 69: 473–480.
161.	Nordberg G, Hedner T, Mellstrand T, Dahlstro¨m B. Pharmacokinetic aspects of intrathecal morphine analgesia. Anesthesiology 1984; 60: 448–454.
162.	Deer T, Krames ES, Hassenbusch SJ et al. Polyanalgesic consensus con- ference 2007: recommendations for the management of pain by intra- thecal (intraspinal) drug delivery: report of an interdisciplinary expert panel. Neuromodulation 2007; 10: 300–328.
163.	Vissers KC, Besse K, Wagemans M et al. Pain in patients with cancer. Pain Pract 2011; 11: 453–475.
164.	Chambers WA. Nerve blocks in palliative care. Br J Anaesth 2008; 101: 95–100.
165.	Doyle D. Nerve blocks in advanced cancer. Practitioner 1982; 226: 539: 541–544.
 
166.	Puli SR, Reddy JB, Bechtold ML et al. EUS-guided celiac plexus neurolysis for pain due to chronic pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer pain. A meta- analysis and systematic review. Dig Dis Sci 2009; 54: 2330–2337.
167.	Arcidiacono PG, Calori G, Carrara S et al. Celiac plexus block for pancreat- ic cancer pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 3: CD007519.
168.	Cherny NJ, Chang V, Frager G et al. Opioid pharmacotherapy in the management of cancer pain: a survey of strategies used by pain physi- cians for the selection of analgesic drugs and routes of administration. Cancer 1995; 76: 1283–1293.
169.	Jain S. Spinal neurolysis. In: Practical Management of Complex Cancer Pain (Oxford Specialist Handbooks in Pain Medicine); Sharma M, Gupta S, Bennett M, Simpson K, eds. Oxford; Oxford University Press 2014.
170.	Finnegan C, Saravanakumar K, Sharma M et al. The role of epidural phenol in cancer patients at the end of life. Palliat Med 2008; 22: 777–778.
171.	National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Spinal Cord Stimulation for Chronic Pain of Neuropathic or Ischaemic Origin. NICE Technology Appraisal Guidance TA 159, Published 22nd October 2008. www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta159 (11 April 2018, date last accessed).
172.	Peng L, Min S, Zejun Z et al. Spinal cord stimulation for cancer-related pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; CD009389.
173.	British Thoracic Society Standards of Care Committee BTS statement on malignant mesothelioma in the UK, 2007. Thorax 2007; 62(Suppl 2): ii1–ii19.
174.	France BD, Lewis RA, Sharma ML, Poolman M. Cordotomy in mesothelioma-related pain: a systematic review. BMJ Support Palliat Care 2014; 4: 19–29.
175.	Bain E, Hugel H, Sharma M. Percutaneous cervical cordotomy for the management of pain from cancer: a prospective review of 45 cases. J Palliat Med 2013; 16: 901–907.
176.	Tomycz L, Forbes J, Ladner T et al. Open thoracic cordotomy as a treat- ment option for severe, debilitating pain. J Neurol Surg A Cent Eur Neurosurg 2013; 75: 126–132.
177.	Lewin J, Hugel H, Sharma ML. Percutaneous cervical cordotomy for non-cancer pain in a patient with terminal esophageal carcinoma. J Pain Symptom Manage 2012; 43: e8–e9.
178.	Colvin LA, Fallon MT. Opioid-induced hyperalgesia: a clinical chal- lenge. Br J Anaesth 2010; 104: 125–127.
179.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
