
 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
 
Annals of Oncology 29 (Supplement 4): iv111–iv125, 2018 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy148
Published online 17 July 2018
 

 

 

P. J. Larkin1,2, N. I. Cherny3, D. La Carpia4, M. Guglielmo5, C. Ostgathe6, F. Scotte´7 & C. I. Ripamonti5, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1School of Nursing, Midwifery and Health Systems, University College Dublin, Dublin; 2Our Lady’s Hospice and Care Services, Dublin, Ireland; 3Cancer Pain and Palliative Medicine Service, Department of Oncology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; 4Centro Medicina Dell’Invecchiamento (Ce.M.I.), Fondazione Policlinico Agostino, Gemelli, Roma; 5Oncology-Supportive Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy; 6Palliative Care Department, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-Universita¨t Erlangen-Nu¨ rnberg, Erlangen, Germany; 7Department of Medical Oncology and Supportive Care, Foch Hospital, Suresnes, France

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: March 2018.


 

 
Constipation is a common problem in patients with advanced can- cer and a significant source of major morbidity and distress, which is often under-appreciated [1]. Constipation is subjectively experi- enced by the patient and diagnostic criteria do not always clearly ex- press the diversity of factors, which may lead to constipation as a clinical problem [2]. Widespread use of opioid analgesics for cancer pain poses specific challenges for patients [3]. Despite its clinical im- pact, constipation is both poorly recognised and poorly treated. Oncologists must be familiar with the common causes of constipa- tion among cancer patients and the strategies to evaluate and man- age this distressing symptom. This European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) is directed to- wards adult cancer patients experiencing constipation as a conse- quence of their cancer diagnosis or treatment. The CPG makes specific reference to the context of opioid-induced constipation (OIC), highlights the impact of constipation and offers strategies for pharmacological and non-pharmacological management, as well as the specific challenges in the management of older patients with can- cer at enhanced risk of constipation.
Definition
Constipation is defined as the slow movement of faeces through the large intestine, resulting in infrequent bowel movements (BMs) and the passage of dry, hard stools [4]. Constipation is a symptom, not a disease. Although usually temporary, it can im- pact significantly on quality of life.
 

The standard clinical definition of chronic (sometimes termed functional) constipation (CC), based on the Rome III criteria [5], requires the presence of any two of the following symptoms for at least 12 weeks in the previous 12 months (not necessarily consecutively):
•	straining during BMs;
•	lumpy or hard stool;
•	sensation of incomplete evacuation;
•	sensation of anorectal blockage or obstruction;
•	manual evacuation procedures to remove stool;
•	< 3 BMs per week.
The description and definition of constipation given here reflects a broader patient cohort experiencing CC as a clinical problem, not solely a cancer population, although the assessment and treatment are similar across both chronic disease and cancer populations. The experience of constipation is highly subjective and, therefore, two further aspects should be taken into consid- eration: (i) measurable objective symptoms, including individ- ual stool characteristics and frequency of defaecation; (ii) patient perception, level of discomfort and ease of defaecation [6].
The Rome IV criteria for functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs) published in 2016 has seen the addition of OIC to the section on Bowel Disorders, defined as ‘constipation triggered or worsened by opioid analgesics’ [7]. The clinical presentation of OIC is similar to other FGIDs and requires differential diagnosis and management.
 





VC   The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 

 

 
Pathophysiology of constipation
Functioning normally, the colon absorbs fluids and transports waste to the rectum through the repetitive and periodic contrac- tions of peristalsis, mediated principally by serotonin or 5- hydroxytryptamine (5-HT). Sodium is actively reabsorbed through active transport channels; water through osmosis. Colonic secretion is mediated through chloride channels and results in a net reabsorption of electrolytes and fluids. The rectum eventually distends, resulting in the urge to defaecate and associ- ated contractions via the rectal sphincter. The average colonic transit time is 20–72 hours.
Constipation represents a disruption of these normal mecha- nisms. Causes may be primary (colonic or anorectal dysfunction) or secondary (disease- or medication-related). Factors contributing to constipation may include disruption of normal motility, excessive dryness of faecal content, diminished perception of rectal distension with loss of urge to defaecate and dysfunction of the rectal sphincter. The longer the stool remains in the colon, the drier it becomes. OIC occurs following titration or increased dosage of opioid medication affecting opioid receptors in the gastrointestinal tract.
Prevalence
The reported prevalence of constipation in advanced cancer patients ranges between 40% and 90% [2, 3]; more common in the opioid- treated population [8, 9]. Prevalence increases with age and the eld- erly are five times more prone to constipation than young people, due to polypharmacy, reduced mobility, reduced hydration and reduced urge to defaecate [10]. In older cancer patients receiving palliative care, constipation is one of the most prevalent symptoms, with prevalence rates ranging between 51% and 55% [11–13].


 
Constipation is a major cause of distress for patients with cancer [14]. Constipation may be complicated by development of
 

nausea, vomiting, haemorrhoids, anal fissure, bowel obstruction and urinary retention [8]. Untreated constipation places a bur- den on the healthcare system, with a need for increased nursing hours and a higher risk of hospitalisation. Prevention of constipa- tion, screening for its presence and early intervention may reduce both patient distress and care costs [15, 16].
Causes and contributing factors
Among cancer patients, common precipitating factors may be clas- sified as organic or functional. Organic contributing factors com- monly include medications (especially opioids, vinca alkaloids, 5-HT3 antagonist antiemetics, iron and antidepressants), metabol- ic aberrations (particularly dehydration, hypercalcaemia, hypokal- aemia and uraemia), neuromuscular dysfunction (autonomic neuropathy and myopathy), structural issues (abdominal or pelvic mass, radiation fibrosis) and pain. Functional factors would in- clude, for example, age, poor food and fluid intake and lack of privacy when toileting (Table 1) [17, 18].
Information regarding the most frequent medications respon- sible for constipation among cancer patients derives from small- scale studies and expert review (Table 2).
Evidence
A search of databases (last search, March 2018) including Medline (through Pubmed), Cochrane CENTRAL, EMBASE, CINHAL and SCOPUS was undertaken. No date restriction was applied. Search terms, using Boolean operators were: ‘constipa- tion’ AND ‘cancer’ OR ‘advanced cancer’ OR ‘palliative care’ OR ‘hospice care’ AND ‘opioid-induced constipation’ AND ‘man- agement’ AND ‘pharmacology’ AND ‘non-pharmacology’. The search prioritised evidence from systematic reviews of rando- mised, controlled trials (RCTs), including meta-analyses and RCTs in cancer populations. However, as there is limited evi- dence in this area, as appropriate, we considered evidence derived from other study designs and from studies in other populations. A manual screening of retrieved articles was then undertaken to
 

 


 
identify further studies to inform the guideline. Studies were reviewed by two authors for quality inclusion and agreed by the expert panel. High quality studies which focused on constipation but not cancer were reviewed and only included if clear extrapola- tion of findings to a cancer population were evident in the expert opinion of the authors. Studies from 2015 to present day reported an increased focus on new and innovative pharmacological treat- ments and the search was then extended to include these new treatments (‘methylnaltrexone’ AND ‘naloxegol’ AND ‘naldeme- dine’) in combination with original search terms. These were then included in the overall review of evidence.

Range of evidence. Although there is a significant body of literature which looks to the pharmacology of CC management, best clinical practice, and more recently cost-effectiveness [17–20], the focus on cancer is limited. The scope of studies identified either provided descriptive pharmacological management of constipation related to a specific treatment or the comparison of pharmacological treat- ments versus placebo. There is a growing body of literature to support the use of peripherally acting mu opioid receptor antagonists (PAMORAs) in the efficacy of laxation reported here [21–25]. In some studies, the constipation was a secondary focus for the study (where, for example, the primary outcome was pain management). There is evidence of high quality reviews with mul- tiple trials regarding CC [26] from which recommendations for oncology practice may be derived. However, extrapolating these results to an advanced cancer or palliative care population is prob- lematic, where comorbidity, frailty and trajectory towards decline may impact negatively on outcomes and effectiveness. The evi- dence presented here reflects that context in terms of the CPG and recommendations made arising out of evidence reviewed. Overall, based on the limited scope of high-quality trials and meta-analyses in advanced cancer, the expert group considered the quality of evi- dence for the management of constipation in patients with cancer to be low and largely based on expert opinion, pharmacological reviews and clinical case reports.

Review of evidence. A 2011 Cochrane systematic review [21] building on an earlier review from 2006 looked at the
 
effectiveness of laxatives versus methylnaltrexone in the manage- ment of constipation in palliative care patients. Seven studies with 616 participants were identified. Two had a crossover de- sign, and three were multicentre. All patients had advanced dis- ease, and most (but not all) had cancer. Four studies looked at the use of lactulose, senna, co-danthramer, misrakasneham and mag- nesium hydroxide with liquid paraffin. Three reported on meth- ylnaltrexone use. Comparisons were between laxative therapy and methynaltrexone versus placebo. The evidence for the use of laxatives was inconclusive. Studies on methylnaltrexone reported on 227 patients and demonstrated that, in comparison to pla- cebo, patients had significantly improved laxation within 4 hours, with only one serious adverse event (AE) reported. Good quality RCTs were poor and, although subcutaneous methylnaltrexone was considered efficacious, further larger and more rigorous in- dependent trials were needed.
A development of this review in 2015 [22] only considered the laxatives noted above but included docusate in the evaluation. The primary outcome was laxation response and secondary out- comes were patient preference and relief of other symptoms asso- ciated with cancer. Five studies (N ¼ 370) were reviewed; all focused on an advanced cancer population, and two had a cross- over study design. Laxatives were either compared or reported as a placebo versus laxative. Studies reviewed had small samples sizes and, in some cases, weak methodology, including being
under-powered and no clear evidence of blinding. Attrition was high (> 50%) but not unusual given the population. As there were very few RCTs, it was not possible to show effectiveness or
benefit of one treatment over another. A noted recommendation is that data from populations beyond palliative care cannot easily be extrapolated and that the nature of palliative care treatment and care may impact on laxative effect.

Opioid-induced constipation: OIC is the most common AE of opioid analgesic therapy in all populations including those with cancer. OIC incidence ranges between 40% and 60% and is vari- able due to dose and type of opioid used. Opioid analgesics act on mu receptors widely distributed in the gastrointestinal tract, resulting in reduced peristalsis and fluid secretion, increased fluid
 
reabsorption and increased sphincter tone. Symptoms would mirror those of a normal constipation pattern. Reducing the opi- oid dose is ineffective. Unless contraindicated by pre-existing diarrhoea, all patients receiving opioid analgesics should be pre- scribed a concomitant laxative [V, B]. Laxative therapies include first-line treatment options [V, B]. In unresolved OIC, new tar- geted therapies (i.e. PAMORAs) may be of value [II, B].
We also identified one very recent mixed-treatment compari- son network meta-analysis of RCTs across a range of interven- tions to manage OIC [23]. The primary outcome was the number of patients reporting a rescue-free bowel movement (RFBM). Secondary outcomes were time to first laxation, AEs and changes to opioid analgesic activity. They identified 23 studies which formed part of a qualitative synthesis and 21 which were quanti- tatively examined using a network meta-analysis approach. In the meta-analysis, no clinical trial that specifically targeted cancer patients was identified, although six studies [24–29] included a cancer population with other groups and one study focused on constipation in cancer [30]. Medications reviewed included lubi- prostone, naldemedine, naloxegol, alvimopan and oral and sub- cutaneous methylnaltrexone. All were more effective than placebo for RFBM. Subcutaneous methylnaltrexone was more effective than oral preparations and in relation to other medica- tions reported, and showed no improvement regarding back- ground pain using opioids. Although the quality of evidence is reported as low or very low, the meta-analysis concluded that subcutaneous methylnaltrexone was safe and effective for OIC.

Methylnaltrexone: Methylnaltrexone is a quaternary derivative of naltrexone, approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for use in the treatment of OIC in advanced illness and palliative care patients whose response to usual laxative therapy has been insufficient. It does not cross the blood–brain barrier and, as a result, it antagonises only peripherally located opioid receptors while sparing centrally mediated analgesic effects of opioid pain medications. There is evidence of predictable effect- iveness after subcutaneous administration (initially once every other day), with most patients achieving defaecation within 90 minutes of administration [II, B] [24, 25, 31, 32]. The fre- quency of administration can be increased, if needed, to once daily.
A review and meta-analyses of methylnaltrexone in OIC [33] for both objective and subjective efficacy and safety outcomes identified seven trials [N 1860], four specifically with cancer patients, where methylnaltrexone was the drug studied and OIC the primary outcome. Secondary outcomes included time to lax- ation, patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) and impact of burden and distress. In each case, methylnaltrexone was com- pared with placebo. The meta-analyses demonstrated a higher stool frequency and less time to laxation in patients receiving methylnaltrexone. Better patient outcomes and less distress were also associated with methylnaltrexone use. AEs were minimal with only a 0.2% incidence reported. The review concluded that methylnaltrexone is a safe and effective treatment in OIC.
This supports a later exploratory single arm, single dose phase II trial; subcutaneous methylnaltrexone to address severe OIC in cancer patients [34] was given to 12 patients presenting with a prognosis of ≥ 3 months and OIC with ≤ 3 laxations in the preceding week. The primary endpoint was a rescue-free
 
laxation ≤ 4 hours after single dose treatment. Secondary end- points included rescue-free laxation within 24 hours following treatment, laxation with or without laxatives at 48 hours, overall pain scores, assessment of laxation and patient satisfaction scores. Four patients (33.3%) had an RFBM after 4 hours, five (41.7%) after 24 hours and 10 (83.5%) achieved laxation within 48 hours. Despite reported recruitment difficulties which led to the small sample, authors conclude that methylnaltrexone is effective and well-tolerated by patients.
An earlier double-blind RCT of fixed-dose methylnaltrexone
[35] was conducted in patients with advanced illness and OIC. Patients were randomised to subcutaneous injection of methyl- naltrexone (8 mg or 12 mg by body weight, n ¼ 116) or placebo (n ¼ 114) every other day for two weeks. Those completing the RCT were eligible to go on to an open label extension of the study (n ¼ 149). The primary endpoint of interest was the percentage of patients with an RFBM with ≤  2 of 4 doses in the first week. Of the methylnaltrexone group, 62.9% achieved the primary end- point versus 9.6% of those taking placebo. Median laxation of the methylnaltrexone group was 0.8 hours as opposed to 23.6 hours in the placebo group. The open label study results were consistent with the RCT in terms of safety and efficacy, and methylnaltrex- one was considered effective and well-tolerated by the patient cohort.
One study already noted [24] specifically focused towards can- cer reported 133 patients described as having advanced illness, currently stable on their opioid and laxative regime and random- ly assigned to receive a subcutaneous injection of methylnaltrex- one at 0.15 mg/kg of body weight versus placebo, every other day for 2 weeks. Co-primary endpoints were defined as laxation with- in 4 hours after first dose and laxation within 4 hours after ≥ 2 of the first 4 doses. Of the intervention group, 48% experienced lax- ation within 4 hours as opposed to only 15% in the placebo group, while 52% reported laxation within 4 hours of ≥ 2 of the first 4 doses, with only 8% reporting the same response in the pla- cebo group. Treatment did not appear to impact analgesic re- sponse or to precipitate opioid withdrawal.

Naloxegol: Naloxegol was the first orally dosed PAMORA indi- cated for the treatment of OIC [36, 37]. It is approved by the EMA for adults who have not responded adequately to previous treatment with laxatives. Based on the mechanism of action, the benefit for cancer patients with OIC is not expected to be differ- ent, and the EMA licence for naloxegol includes cancer patients. The recommended dose is 25 mg once daily which can be reduced to 12.5 mg daily in case of abdominal cramps or other AEs [29].
This phase II double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, dose-escalation study [29] evaluated efficacy, tolerability and safety of naloxegol in patients with OIC. Two-hundred and seven patients with ≤ 3 BMs per week were randomised to a 4-week trial of naloxegol (5, 25 or 50 mg in sequential cohort following 1-week placebo) versus placebo. The primary endpoint was me- dian change in spontaneous BMs (SBMs) in 1 week. A positive re- sponse to dosage at 25 and 50 mg versus placebo was reported. Increase in SBMs was maintained over 4 weeks. AEs were described as transient (e.g. nausea, abdominal pain and diar- rhoea), although these did increase in severity relative to higher doses. The outcome of the study was that naloxegol improves the frequency of SBMs with minimal AEs.
 
A large study undertaken with a non-cancer population (but with relevance to advanced cancer and palliative care) [38] pre- sented two identical phase III double-blind studies (termed studies 4 and 5) to evaluate the efficacy and safety of naloxegol for the treatment of OIC. Using a population of opioid-dependent, non- cancer patients (N ¼ 652; study 4 and N ¼ 700; study 5), patients were assigned to receive 12.5 or 25 mg of naloxegol or placebo over a period of 12 weeks. The primary endpoint was noted as ≥ 3 BMs for ≥ 9 out of 12 weeks and for ≥ 3 BMs in the last 4 weeks of the intention-to-treat group. The study also reported response rate in the subpopulation of those who had inadequate laxative response before being enrolled to the study, time to first SBM and number of days per week, with ≥ 1 SBMs as secondary endpoint.
Results demonstrated a significantly higher response with 25 mg of naloxegol than with placebo. The studies concluded that naloxegol led to a higher rate of treatment response compared with placebo, with no loss of opioid-mediated analgesia. As such, outcomes of this study are relevant to a palliative care population, given the likelihood of need for opioid analgesia and concomitant constipation treatment to manage symptoms.
This study was later further reported in a pharmaceutical in- dustry report on the pooled analysis of data from the two studies that supported the assertion of the benefit of naloxegol in the treatment of OIC [39].

Naldemedine: Naldemedine, a more recent PAMORA, has been the subject of phase II and III trials. Two recent studies [30, 40] re- port on a phase IIb and III trials, respectively, to determine the dose and safety of naldemedine with cancer patients experiencing OIC.
The phase IIb study [30] involved a randomised double-blind multicentre trial to assess efficacy and safety of naldemedine. Two-hundred and twenty-seven patients were randomly assigned to once daily oral naldemedine (at 0.1, 0.2 or 0.4 mg) or placebo (n ¼ 56 in each group). The primary endpoint was a change in SBMs per week from baseline including response rate, change from baseline, change in straining at stool and evidence of com- plete evacuation. A positive change in SBMs was reported at all doses of naldemedine in comparison with placebo. Change of SBMs with respect to reduction of straining was noted to be sig- nificant when doses of 0.2 and 0.4 mg were taken. Diarrhoea was a notable AE reported in the naldemedine group.
Based on these results, a phase III study [40] was undertaken. This study included a 12-week open label extension study as well as a 2- week, randomised double-blind placebo-controlled trial termed COMPOSE-4 and COMPOSE-5. In the COMPOSE-4 study, 193
patients were randomly assigned to a once-daily dose of 0.2 mg nal- demedine (n ¼ 97) or placebo (n ¼ 96). The primary endpoint was recorded as an increase in SBMs per week from baseline. The COMPOSE-5 study focused specifically on safety. The COMPOSE- 4 study demonstrated a 74% SBM response rate in the intervention group as opposed to placebo (34.4%). The intervention group also reported a change from baseline in terms of SBMs and reduction of straining at stool. Higher levels of AEs (e.g. diarrhoea) were reported in the intervention group but were also reported frequently in the COMPOSE-5 study. It was concluded that 0.2 mg naldemedine was effective to manage OIC and was generally well-tolerated.

Prolonged-release oxycodone-naloxone: The use of a prolonged- release (PR) combination formulation of oxycodone and
 

 

naloxone is also increasingly evident in practice [41]. Tertiary amines including naloxone have been shown to restore laxation when opioid therapy is used. The risk of reversal of centrally mediated analgesia and withdrawal may be reduced by the use of PR formulations. Combined opiate/naloxone medications have been shown to reduce the risk of OIC through a range of open label, phase II and III studies [II, B] [42].
PR oxycodone/naloxone versus PR oral oxycodone alone was reported in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial [41] evaluating both analgesia and bowel function. Two-hundred and two opioid- stable patients (mainly non-cancer), taking 40–60 mg oxycodone daily, were randomised to either naloxone (10–40 mg daily) or pla- cebo. The Bowel Function Inventory (BFI) was used to assess con- stipation. Patients taking a combined oral therapy reported significant improvements in bowel function compared with those only taking PR oral oxycodone, with no loss of analgesic efficiency. This outcome has been supported in a more recent review of litera- ture of clinical trials and observational studies into the evidence for PR oxycodone/naloxone treating moderate-to-severe pain and specific impact on opioid-induced bowel dysfunction (OIBD) [42]. Thirty-eight clinical trials and observation studies were reported of which seven were undertaken with a cancer population [43–50]. Other studies reported on patient groups with direct rele- vance to patients with cancer (e.g. those with neuropathic pain, pain in the elderly and patients with pain and refractory laxatives symptoms) [42]. Although the method of review is not explicit, the range of evidence presents PR oxycodone/naloxone as an effective treatment of moderate-to-severe pain and effective OIC bowel management for patients unresponsive to normal laxative therapy. Although these studies demonstrate a growing body of evi- dence, particularly in relation to therapies to manage OIC, the overall impact remains relatively small in terms of application to clinical practice, and further studies are needed to support these early data. Some of the study outcomes reported here do include an advanced cancer population. However, although the use of PAMORAs is evident in practice, the recommendation would be that they should be used in patients who have not responded suc-
cessfully to laxative intervention.


 
All cancer patients should be evaluated for constipation [V, B]. In patients with advanced cancer, underlying causative factors for
 
constipation are usually long-standing and may be modifiable. Frequent, regular assessment of bowel pattern is important to de- tect improvements or deterioration in bowel patterns, regardless of whether or not the patient is receiving treatment [2].
A full medical history will assist in identifying causes of consti- pation and should elicit key facts when constipation is suspected (Table 3) [2].
Assessment should include questions to determine possible causes for constipation including:
•	eating and drinking habits;
•	medication use (medically prescribed and purchased ‘over the counter’);
•	level of physical activity (relative to stage of illness);
•	pre-existing irritable bowel syndrome or diverticular disease;
•	other comorbid disease (e.g. heart failure, chronic pulmonary airway disease);
•	environmental factors (e.g. lack of privacy, assistance needed, bed bound).
The evidence for this arises from consensus expert review and national guidelines [2, 51] but is considered sufficient to make recommendations for best practice [V, B].
Physical assessment includes abdominal examination [auscul- tation, perineal inspection and digital rectal examination (DRE)] [V, B]. DRE is a safe and simple, diagnostic tool which may have particular benefit in advanced disease [52]. Table 4 presents the rationale for basic physical assessment.
If constipation is considered part of a spinal cord compression syndrome, full neurological examination is essential, including assessment of anal sphincter tone (lax with colonic hypotonia) and rectal sensation. Again, although derived from expert review, clinical examination including DRE is generally recommended in practice [2, 53].

Investigations
Investigations are not routinely necessary. If suspected clinically, corrected calcium levels and thyroid function should be checked. More extensive investigation is warranted for those with severe symptoms, sudden changes in number and consistency of BMs or blood in the stool, and for older adults relative to their health and stage of disease.

Assessment scales for constipation
A number of cancer and palliative care symptom assessment scales include a constipation intensity numerical rating scale [54– 60]. Specific constipation assessment scales have been shown to have benefit in advanced disease, notably the Victoria Bowel Performance Scale (BPS) and the Constipation Assessment Scale (CAS) [61, 62] as well as those which use images, such as the Bristol Stool Form Scale, with good clinical utility [2, 63].
Consensus recommendations from a multidisciplinary exert panel of the American Academy of Pain Medicine [62] eval- uated five validated assessment tools used in constipation man- agement for an optimal OIC assessment model in clinical practice: the Patient Assessment of Constipation–Symptoms (PAC-SYM), Patient Assessment of Constipation–Quality of Life (PAC-QoL), Stool Symptom Screener (SSS), Bowel Function Index (BFI) and Bowel Function Diary (BF-Diary).
 

 

BFI and SSS had best utility, although PAC-SYM and BFI were most commonly used. The BF-Diary had specific resonance to OIC, but the panel concluded that the psychometrically vali- dated BFI was less complex and therefore more favourable to use in practice. Consensus was also reached on when to pre- scribe medication to address OIC, based on symptom severity as indicated by the tool. They concluded that prescription should be introduced for a patient with a BFI score ≥ 30 points and no response to initial laxative therapies.
In general, due its subjective nature, PROMs are a preferred as- pect of clinical assessment of constipation [64, 65]. However, be- yond the one study noted above [62], no large-scale studies were identified, and further studies are needed to determine optimal tools for practice. As noted in recommendations below, although evidence is limited, best practice would indicate strong clinical benefit to utilising constipation assessment tools in conjunction with PROMs for best outcome [V, B].
We identified one prospective cross-sectional study to assess the correlation between use of the CAS and a plain abdominal X-ray in an advanced cancer population (N ¼ 50), in a palliative care unit. All patients were given an abdominal X-ray, and the ex- tent of faeces was then scored on a scale of 0–12. Three palliative care physicians then independently scored the X-ray, and the Kendall Tau Correlation Coefficient was used to estimate and test correlations. No concordant correlation was found between physicians’ CAS and independent radiological scores, nor their CAS score and combined physician radiology scores, with only a moderate correlation overall in physician radiological scores. Therefore, in the absence of any strong correlation, the authors of the study recommended that optimal clinical assessment should include radiological examination [V, C] [66]. However, we con- clude that evidence currently remains limited, with only one small study and one expert opinion (as a Letter to the Editor) noted [67], and that further quality studies are needed.
Recommendations:
•	All cancer patients should be evaluated for constipation [V, B].
•	Assessment should include questions to determine possible causes for constipation [V, B].
•	The use of PROMs is recommended [V, B].
•	If constipation is identiﬁed, physical examination should in- clude abdominal examination, perineal inspection and DRE [V, B].
•	Investigations are not routinely necessary [V, B].
 

 


•	If suspected clinically, corrected calcium levels and thyroid function should be checked. More extensive investigation is warranted for those with severe symptoms, sudden changes in number and consistency of BMs or blood in the stool, and for older adults relative to their health and stage of disease.
•	Plain abdominal X-ray, although limited as a tool in itself, may be useful to image the extent of faecal loading and to ex- clude bowel obstruction [V, C].


 
Overall principles for management

Best practice is based on a balance between strategies for preven- tion and self-care and prescribed oral and rectal laxative therapy [V, B]. Approaches may differ between those undergoing onco- logical therapy and those receiving palliative care alone. Care should be taken, where possible, to avoid drug interaction be- tween anticancer therapy and constipation treatments [68, 69].

Prevention and self-care strategies (non-pharmaco- logical approaches)
Healthcare professionals should encourage and promote changes in the patient’s lifestyle or other underlying factors that may pre- vent or reduce constipation. Preventative measures should be on- going throughout a patient’s care. Key factors for prevention and self-care to prevent or reduce risk are listed in Table 5. Of note, lifestyle factors alone have a positive but limited influence on constipation and should not be the sole focus of management [2]. As disease progresses and health deteriorates, lifestyle factors may become less important in clinical management.
We did not identify any studies on non-pharmacological approaches with cancer populations. There is some evidence that abdominal massage can be efficacious in reducing gastrointes- tinal symptoms and improving bowel efficiency, particularly in those patients with  concomitant neurogenic  problems  [II, B]
[70] but not in a cancer population. A multicentre randomised superiority trial to compare abdominal massage against no mas- sage was conducted in a sample of multiple sclerosis patients who had neurogenic bowel dysfunction (NBD). Patients (N ¼ 30) were randomly assigned to an intervention group, where the care- giver carried out a daily abdominal massage over 4 weeks versus a
 
control group of bowel management advice only. Patients were asked to complete the Constipation Scoring System (CSS), the NBD score and to keep a bowel diary. Scores were taken at base- line, at week 4 and at week 8; the NBD score was taken also at week 24.
Both groups showed a decrease in constipation between weeks
0 and 4 based on the CSS. However, the extent of improvement was significantly greater in the massage group than in the control group.
A more recent pilot RCT [II, B] [71] also looked at the use of massage in patients with Parkinson’s disease, a patient group more recently seen by palliative care specialists. Thirty-two patients from three movement disorder clinics were randomised to either a 6-week daily abdominal massage plus a lifestyle consti- pation management programme (n ¼ 16) or to a control group (n ¼ 16) who received lifestyle management only. Data were col- lected at baseline, week 6 (post intervention) and at week 10 using a bowel diary, the Gastrointestinal Rating Scale and the scales used in the multiple sclerosis study described above (i.e. the NBD score and CSS) and qualitative analysis of patient and caregiver interviews. Massage was largely administered by a caregiver. Results demonstrated that those who received both massage and lifestyle support had a better laxation outcome than those receiv- ing lifestyle advice alone. The practice of massage was considered efficacious and, therefore, of added benefit to patients. These are small-scale studies with no evident application to cancer patients. Without further evidence, they are currently considered to be of limited value to standard laxative management and lifestyle fac- tors to manage constipation in those with advanced illness.
In terms of other non-pharmacological therapies, we did not find any studies with sufficient evidence relative to an advanced illness population.

Laxative use, choice and rationale
Judicious use of laxatives is often essential in the prevention and relief of constipation. There is limited evidence to support the use of one laxative over another [19, 20, 22, 32]. Recommendations for patients with advanced cancer regarding the selection of laxa- tives are proposed in Table 6, noting those which are generally preferred in clinical practice [V, B].

Use of suppositories and enemas
Suppositories and enemas are a preferred first-line therapy when DRE identifies a full rectum or faecal impaction [V, B] [2, 63]. Suppositories and enemas may be perceived as a more invasive option by patients. Enemas (such as hyperosmotic saline) and suppositories increase water content and stimulate peristalsis to aid in expulsion, and both work more quickly than oral laxatives.

Suppositories. Suppositories containing glycerine, bisacodyl oxy- phenisatin (veripaque) and CO2-releasing compounds are all stool softeners and stimulants for rectal motility. They are com- monly used for short-term treatments and are often effective. We found no evidence that treatment of constipation with supposito- ries has been studied in patients with cancer. One Cochrane sys- tematic review has reported on the effectiveness of CO2-releasing
 
Table 6. Types of laxatives and rationale for use

Type	Rationale

Laxatives generally preferred in advanced disease
Osmotic laxatives	Strongly endorsed in systematic reviews of chronic constipation [88, 89]
•	PEG (Macrogol):
Virtually no net gain or loss of sodium and potassium
•	Lactulose:
Not absorbed by the small bowel. Latency of 2–3 days before onset of effect. Intolerance to the sweet taste, nausea, abdominal distention or discomfort are common
•	Magnesium and sulfate salts:
Commonly used laxatives. Mainly osmotic action. Excessive doses of oral magnesium salts can lead to hypermagnesaemia. Use cautiously in renal impairment [V, D] [90]
Stimulant laxatives	• Anthranoid plant compounds (senna, aloe, cascara):
Hydrolysed by glycosidases of the colonic bacteria to yield the active molecules. Both motor and secretory effects on the colon. Best taken in the evening or at bedtime, with the aim of producing a normal stool next morning. Wide variation in clinical effectiveness. Stimulating effect too great for overtly weak or debilitated patients
•	Polyphenolic compounds:
Bisacodyl and sodium picosulfate work similarly to anthranoid laxatives; short-term use in situations of refractory constipa- tion recommended

Laxatives generally not recommended in advanced disease
Bulk laxatives	Useful for patients who cannot take adequate dietary ﬁbres. Requires ﬂuid volume and impact wanes over time. Not recommended for OIC

Detergent/Stool softener	Stimulates ﬂuid secretion by the small and large intestine. The use of docusate sodium in palliative care is based on inadequate experimental evidence [V, C] [91, 92]

Liquid parafﬁn	A mineral oil that softens and lubricates the stools. Aspiration may cause lipoid pneumonia [93], anal seepage, skin excoriation and a foreign body reaction if there is a break in the anorectal mucosa. Less effective than PEG

OIC, opioid-induced constipation; PEG, polyethylene glycol.


suppositories on adults with central neurological dysfunction cit- ing two RCTs but not applicable in the context of cancer [72].

 
Enemas. In general, enemas are used only if oral treatment fails after several days and in order to prevent faecal impaction [2, 63]. Small volume self-administered enemas are commercially avail- able and are often adequate. Larger volume clinician- administered enemas should be administered by an experienced health professional [IV, C] [25]. The use of enemas involves risks of perforation of the intestinal wall (which should be anticipated and suspected if abdominal pain occurs), rectal mucosal damage and bacteraemia. Patients on therapeutic or prophylactic antico- agulation or who are affected by coagulation and platelet disor- ders are at risk of bleeding complications or intramural haematomas [73, 74].
Contraindications to enemas in the treatment of constipation are presented in Table 7.
Table 8 presents a range of enemas commonly used in practice and the rationale for use. Evidence to support choice of one type of enema over another is limited.
Recommendations for the management of constipation:
•	Best practice is based on a balance between strategies for pre- vention and self-care and prescribed oral and rectal laxative therapy [V, B].
 












•	Key factors for prevention and self-care in the management of constipation include: ensuring privacy and comfort to allow a patient to defaecate normally; positioning (to assist gravity, a small footstool may help patient exert pressure more easily); increased ﬂuid intake; increased activity and increased mobility within patient limits (even bed to chair); anticipatory management of constipation when opioids are prescribed [V, B].
•	There is some evidence that abdominal massage can be efﬁca-
cious in reducing gastrointestinal symptoms and improving
 
Table 8. Enemas, rationale for use and potential AEs

Enema type	Rationale	Risks/comments

 
Normal saline	Distend rectum and moisten stools/soften faeces with less irritating
effects on rectal mucosa
 
Large volume watery enemas risk water intoxication if the enema is retained
 
Soap solution enema	1 mL of mild liquid soap per 200 mL of solution (1:200 ratio)	May cause chemical irritation of the mucous
 
Total volume 1000 mL

Osmotic micro-enema	Commercial preparations (e.g. enema containing sorbitol) contain a
combination of agents, mainly sodium lauryl sulfoacetate (a wet- ting agent similar to docusate) and osmotic agents such as so- dium citrate and glycerol. Sodium citrate creates an osmotic imbalance that brings water into the large bowel to soften the stool and stimulates the bowel to contract. Sodium lauryl sulfoa- cetate improves the penetrating abilities of the solution and gly- cerol helps to lubricate the stools
 
membranes

Works best if rectum is full on DRE
 
Hypertonic sodium phosphate enema
 
Both distend and stimulate rectal motility	AEs are uncommon
 
Docusate sodium enema
 
Docusate sodium softens stool by aiding water penetration of the faecal mass. Takes 5–20 min
 
Common AEs are anal or rectal burning and pain, short-lasting diarrhoea
 
Bisacodyl enema	Promotes intestinal motility by means of a passage of water into the intestinal lumen from vessels
 
Can cause abdominal discomfort (including cramps and abdominal pain) and diarrhoea
 
Retention enema	Retention enemas are held within the large intestine for a speciﬁed
period, usually at least 30 min. Warm oil retention enemas (cot- tonseed, arachis or olive oil) lubricate and soften the stool so it can be expelled more easily
PeristeenVR	A relatively new anal irrigation system. Introduces water (500–
700 mL) into the bowel using a rectal catheter and it is carried out while sitting on the toilet. Stimulates peristalsis and bowel emptying. Evidence for its use comes primarily from studies on neurogenic bowel dysfunction in patients with spinal cord injury and may not be practical in advanced disease [93]
 
Arachis oil is derived from peanuts, so peanut allergy may prevent its use



Invasive procedure. Needs close supervision to ensure safe administration
 

AE, adverse event; DRE, digital rectal examination.




 
bowel efﬁciency, particularly in those patients with concomi- tant neurogenic problems [II, B].
•	When laxatives are needed, preferred options include the os- motic laxatives [polyethylene glycol (PEG), lactulose or mag- nesium and sulfate salts] or stimulant laxatives (senna, cascara, bisacodyl and sodium picosulfate) [V, C].
•	Magnesium and sulfate salts can lead to hypermagnesaemia and should be used cautiously in renal impairment [V, D].
•	Suppositories and enemas are a preferred ﬁrst-line therapy when DRE identiﬁes  a  full  rectum  or  faecal  impaction [V, B].
•	Enemas are contraindicated for patients with neutropaenia or thrombocytopaenia, paralytic ileus or intestinal obstruction, recent colorectal or gynaecological surgery, recent anal or rectal trauma, severe colitis, inﬂammation or infection of the abdomen, toxic megacolon, undiagnosed abdominal pain or recent radiotherapy to the pelvic area [V, D].
 
Recommendations for the management of OIC:
•	Unless contraindicated by pre-existing diarrhoea, all patients receiving opioid analgesics should be prescribed a concomi- tant laxative [V, B].
•	Osmotic or stimulant laxatives are generally preferred [V, B].
•	Bulk laxatives such as psyllium are not recommended for OIC [V, D].
•	In unresolved OIC, peripheral opioid antagonists such as
methylnaltrexone or naloxegol may be of value [II, B] [23–40].
•	Combined opiate/naloxone medications have been shown to reduce the risk of OIC through both open label, phase II and III studies [II, B] [41–50].

Management of faecal impaction
Faecal impaction is a complication of CC evidenced by a large mass of dry, hard stool in the rectum or proximal colon due to
 

 
Figure 1. Management of constipation in advanced disease. aContraindicated for patients with neutropaenia (WBC < 0.5 cells/lL). WBC, white blood cell count.

 
CC [75]. Watery stool from higher in the bowel may leak (over- flow). Diagnosis of faecal impaction is confirmed by DRE. Where faecal impactions occur in the proximal rectum or sig- moid colon, DRE will be non-diagnostic. The treatment of a dis- tal faecal impaction has not been the subject of clinical trials. Practice reports the utility of digital fragmentation of the stool, followed by enema (water or oil retention) or suppository to fa- cilitate its passage through the anal canal. Once the distal colon has been partially emptied with disimpaction and enemas, PEG may be administered orally. In the case of proximal faecal impac- tion and in the absence of complete bowel obstruction, lavage with PEG solutions containing electrolytes may help to soften or wash out stool. Complications of faecal impaction, though un- common, include urinary tract obstruction, perforation of the colon, dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, renal insufficiency, faecal incontinence, decubitus ulcers, stercoral ulcers and rectal bleeding [76, 77].
Recommendation:
•	In the absence of suspected perforation or bleed, the manage- ment of faecal impaction involves disimpaction (usually through digital fragmentation and extraction of the stool), followed by the implementation of a maintenance bowel regi- men to prevent recurrence [V, B] [75–78].
 
Management of constipation in the elderly cancer patient
Aetiology. Ageing causes a degenerative process in the enteric ner- vous system. The effect of cancer and oncological treatments can be magnified, leading to a greater risk of severe constipation, fae- cal impaction and complications such as intestinal obstruction.
Elderly patients with cancer represent a distinct subgroup at enhanced risk of constipation and its sequelae. The prevalence of constipation in the older adult ranges from 24% to 50% and laxa- tives are used daily by 10%–18% of community-dwelling older adults and 74% of nursing home residents [79, 80].
The evidence for the management of constipation in the older person is notably based on expert opinion and therefore, al- though appropriate for best practice, further high-quality studies are required to support clinical practice. There are two points to note with specific reference to ageing:

Assessment. Particular attention should be paid to the assessment of elderly patients [V, B]. Noting all comorbidities, a complete medication list should be obtained. Withdrawal of inappropriate or unnecessary medications is important. Key factors include:
•	A social history particularly focused on the patient’s current living situation (living with family or alone; in a nursing
 
Table 9. Summary of recommendations

Assessment and diagnosis
•	All cancer patients should be evaluated for constipation [V, B]
•	Assessment should include questions to determine possible causes for constipation [V, B]
•	The use of PROMs is recommended [V, B]
•	If constipation is identiﬁed, physical examination should include abdominal examination, perineal inspection and DRE [V, B]
•	Investigations are not routinely necessary [V, B]
•	If suspected clinically, corrected calcium levels and thyroid function should be checked. More extensive investigation is warranted for those with
severe symptoms, sudden changes in number and consistency of BMs or blood in the stool and for older adults relative to their health and stage of disease
•	Plain abdominal X-ray, although limited as a tool in itself, may be useful to image the extent of faecal loading and to exclude bowel obstruction [V, C]

Management
•	Best practice is based on a balance between strategies for prevention and self-care and prescribed oral and rectal laxative therapy [V, B]
•	Key factors for prevention and self-care in the management of constipation include: ensuring privacy and comfort to allow a patient to defaecate normally; positioning (to assist gravity, a small footstool may help patient exert pressure more easily); increased ﬂuid intake; increased activity and increased mobility within patient limits (even bed to chair); anticipatory management of constipation when opioids are prescribed [V, B]
•	There is some evidence that abdominal massage can be efﬁcacious in reducing gastrointestinal symptoms and improving bowel efﬁciency, particularly in those patients with concomitant neurogenic problems [II, B]
•	When laxatives are needed, preferred options include the osmotic laxatives (PEG, lactulose or magnesium and sulfate salts) or stimulant laxatives (senna, cascara, bisacodyl and sodium picosulfate) [V, C]
•	Magnesium and sulfate salts can lead to hypermagnesaemia and should be used cautiously in renal impairment [V, D]
•	Suppositories and enemas are a preferred ﬁrst-line therapy when DRE identiﬁes a full rectum or faecal impaction [V, B]
•	Enemas are contraindicated for patients with neutropaenia or thrombocytopaenia, paralytic ileus or intestinal obstruction, recent colorectal or gynaecological surgery, recent anal or rectal trauma, severe colitis, inﬂammation or infection of the abdomen, toxic megacolon, undiagnosed abdominal pain or recent radiotherapy to the pelvic area [V, D]

Opioid-induced constipation
•	Unless contraindicated by pre-existing diarrhoea, all patients receiving opioid analgesics should be prescribed a concomitant laxative [V, B]
•	Laxative therapies include ﬁrst-line treatment options [V, B]; osmotic or stimulant laxatives are generally preferred [V, B]
•	Bulk laxatives such as psyllium are not recommended for OIC [V, D]
•	Combined opiate/naloxone medications have been shown to reduce the risk of OIC through both open label, phase II and phase III studies [II, B]
•	In unresolved OIC, new targeted therapies (PAMORAs) may be of value [II, B]

Faecal impaction
•	In the absence of suspected perforation or bleed, best practice involves disimpaction (usually through digital fragmentation and extraction of the stool), followed by the implementation of a maintenance bowel regimen to prevent recurrence [V, B]

Constipation in the elderly cancer patient
•	Particular attention should be paid to the assessment of elderly patients [V, B]
•	Key prevention measures include:
O ensuring access to toilets, especially in all cases of decreased mobility [V, B]
O dietetic support [V, B]
O managing known decrease in food intake (anorexia of ageing, chewing difﬁculties) which negatively inﬂuence stool volume, consistence and, consequently, BMs [V, B]
O optimised toileting, educating patients to attempt defaecation at least twice a day, usually 30 min after meals and to strain no more than 5 min [V, B]
•	Laxatives must be individualised and targeted to the older person’s medical history (cardiac and renal comorbid conditions), drug interactions and AEs [V, B]
•	Regular monitoring of chronic kidney/heart failure when a concomitant treatment with diuretics or cardiac glycosides is prescribed (risk of dehydration and electrolyte imbalances) [V, B]
•	PEG (17 g/day) offers an efﬁcacious and tolerable solution for elderly patients (good safety proﬁle) [V, B]
•	Avoid liquid parafﬁn for bed-bound patients and those with swallowing disorders (due to risk of aspiration lipoid pneumonia) [V, D]
•	Saline laxatives (e.g. magnesium hydroxide) have not been examined in older adults, they should be used with caution because of the risk of hypermagnesaemia [V, D]
•	Non-absorbable, soluble dietary ﬁbre or bulk agents should be avoided in non-ambulatory patients with low ﬂuid intake because of the increased risk of mechanical obstruction [V, D]. Stimulant laxatives can be used, cognisant of risk for pain and cramps
•	If swallowing difﬁculties or a repeated faecal impaction present, rectal measures (enemas and suppositories) can be the preferred choice of treatment [V, B]. Isotonic saline enemas are preferable in older adults because of the potential AEs of sodium phosphate enemas in this age group [V, B]

AE, adverse event; BM, bowel movement; DRE, digital rectal examination; OIC, opioid-induced constipation; PAMORA, peripherally acting mu opioid recep- tor antagonist; PEG, polyethylene glycol; PROM, patient-reported outcome measure.
 

 

 
home or in hospice) to understand timing and feasibility of ongoing assessment of bowel pattern and choice of best therapeutic strategy for the patient.
•	Mobility and autonomy in activities of daily living [81] (risk for poor nutrition and lack of independence in toileting).
•	Presence of cognitive impairment (caregiver involvement for reliable information and better patient cooperation and com- fort during physical examination is crucial).
Recommendations for managing constipation in older people with cancer:
•	Particular attention should be paid to the assessment of elder- ly cancer patients [V, B] [78, 79]
•	For this age group, prevention approaches include:
O ensuring access to toilets, especially in all cases of decreased mobility [V, B];
O dietetic support [V, B];
O managing known decrease in food intake (anorexia of age- ing, chewing difﬁculties) which negatively inﬂuence stool volume, consistence and, consequently, BMs [V, B];
O optimised toileting: educating patients to attempt defaeca- tion at least twice a day, usually 30 minutes after meals and to strain no more than 5 minutes [V, B].
•	Laxatives must be individualised and targeted to the older person’s medical history (cardiac and renal comorbid condi- tions), drug interactions and AEs [V, B] [81].
•	Regular monitoring of chronic kidney/heart failure when a concomitant treatment with diuretics or cardiac glycosides is prescribed (risk of dehydration and electrolyte imbalances) [V, B].
•	PEG (17 g/day) offers an efﬁcacious and tolerable solution for elderly patients (good safety proﬁle) [V, B] [26, 81, 82].
•	Avoid liquid parafﬁn for bed-bound patients and those with swallowing disorders (due to risk of aspiration lipoid pneu- monia) [V, D].
•	Saline laxatives (e. g. magnesium hydroxide) have not been examined in older adults and should be used with caution be- cause of the risk of hypermagnesaemia.
 
•	Non-absorbable, soluble dietary ﬁbre or bulk agents should be avoided in non-ambulatory patients with low ﬂuid intake because of the increased   risk of mechanical   obstruction [V, D]. Stimulant laxatives can be used, cognisant of risk for pain and cramps.
•	If swallowing difﬁculties or a repeated faecal impaction pre- sent, rectal measures (enemas and suppositories) can be the preferred choice of treatment [V, B]. Isotonic saline enemas are preferable in older adults because of the potential AEs of sodium phosphate enemas in this age group.

 
Figure 1 provides an algorithm of diagnosis and treatment of con- stipation in advanced illness. Constipation is a major management issue for cancer clinicians. There is a clinical imperative for oncolo- gists to be familiar with the common causes of this problem, its evaluation and management strategies. The lack of robust studies and over-reliance on expert review and consensus means that this clinical area requires further ongoing clinical research investigation.

 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development http://www.esmo.org/ Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The relevant litera- ture has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of rec- ommendations is shown in Table 9.
Levels of evidence (LoEs) and grades of recommendation (GoRs) given in this clinical practice guideline have been applied using the system shown in Table 10. The LoEs and GoRs are adapted from the Infectious Diseases Society of America-United States Public Health Service Grading System. LoEs are reported on a scale from I to V, where I is applied when evidence from at least one large RCT of good methodological quality (low potential for bias) or meta-analyses of well-conducted randomised trials
 
without heterogeneity is identified, and V is applied for studies without a control group, case reports and expert opinions. GoRs are described from A to E, where A represents strong evidence for efficacy with a substantial clinical benefit (and therefore strongly recommended) through to E, where there is strong evidence against efficacy or for adverse outcome and would never be recom- mended. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty.
The review of evidence and writing of sub-sections for this CPG was assigned to each author as follows: CO provided the section on assessment and clinical management; DLC and MG revised the section on palliative care and older people; PJL reviewed the sec- tions on non-pharmacological management and faecal impaction; FS revised the section on new mu opioid receptor antagonists; NIC, FS and PJL reviewed and revised the LoE and GoR where ap- propriate. All authors reviewed and consolidated the CPG in its en- tirety. NIC provided an earlier draft ESMO guideline on the management of constipation for the group to review and utilise as a template for this CPG. PJL collated each author’s revised section into a revised CPG, which was reviewed and agreed by the team. Each author identified and sourced the literature for their respect- ive section. All authors approved the final CPG.


 
The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.

 
1.	Laugsand EA, Jakobsen G, Kaasa S, Klepstad P. Inadequate symptom control in advanced cancer patients across Europe. Support Care Cancer 2011; 19: 2005–2014.
2.	Larkin PJ, Sykes NP, Centeno C. The management of constipation in pal- liative care: clinical practice recommendations. Palliat Med 2008; 22: 796–807.
3.	Staats PS, Markowitz J, Schein J. Incidence of constipation associated with long-acting opioid therapy: a comparative study. South Med J 2004; 97: 129–134.
4.	Sykes NP. Constipation and Diarrhoea. In D Doyle, GWC Hanks, N Cherny, K Calman (eds), Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine, 3rd edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press 2004; 483–496.
5.	Drossman DA. Rome III: the new criteria. Chin J Dig Dis 2006; 7: 181–185.
6.	Shih DQ, Kwan LY. All roads lead to Rome: update on Rome III criteria and new treatment options. Gastroenterol Rep 2007; 1: 56–65.
7.	Tack J, Drossman DA. What’s new in Rome IV? J Neurogastroenterol Motil 2017; 29: e13053.
8.	Thorpe DM. Management of opioid-induced constipation. Curr Pain Headache Rep 2001; 5: 237–240.
9.	Goodman M, Low J, Wilkinson S. Constipation management in pallia- tive care: a survey of practices in the United Kingdom. J Pain Symptom Manage 2005; 29: 238–244.
10.	Bouras EP, Tangalos EG. Chronic constipation in the elderly. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2009; 38: 463–480.
11.	Genz H, Jenetzky E, Hauer K. Palliative geriatrics. What are the differen- ces between oncologic and non-oncologic palliative geriatric inpatients? Z Gerontol Geriat 2010; 43: 369–375 (in German).
12.	Teunissen SC, de Haes HC, Voest EE, de Graeff A. Does age matter in palliative care? Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2006; 60: 152–158.
13.	Van Lancker A, Velghe A, Van Hecke A. Prevalence of symptoms in older palliative cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 47: 90–104.
 
14.	Gervais C, Ducrotte´ P, Piche T et al. Constipation and cancer: current strategies. Bull Cancer 2016; 103: 794–804 (in French).
15.	Wee B, Adams A, Thompson K et al. How much does it cost a specialist palliative care unit to manage constipation in patients receiving opioid therapy? J Pain Symptom Manage 2010; 39: 644–654.
16.	Iskedjian M, Iyer S, Librach L et al. Methylnaltrexone in the treatment of opioid-induced constipation in cancer patients receiving palliative care: willingness-to-pay and cost-benefit analysis. J Pain Symptom Manage 2011; 41: 104–115.
17.	Dukas L, Willett WC, Giovannucci EL. Association between physical ac- tivity, fiber intake, and other lifestyle variables and constipation in a study of women. Am J Gastroenterol 2003; 98: 1790–1796.
18.	Winge K, Rasmussen D, Werdelin LM. Constipation in neurological dis- eases. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2003; 74: 13–19.
19.	Boland JW, Boland EG. Pharmacological therapies for opioid induced constipation in adults with cancer. BMJ 2017; 358: j3313.
20.	Gatti A, Sabato AF. Management of opioid-induced constipation in can- cer patients: focus on methylnaltrexone. Clin Drug Investig 2012; 32: 293–301.
21.	Candy B, Jones L, Goodman ML et al. Laxatives or methylnaltrexone for the management of constipation in palliative care patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 1: CD003448.
22.	Candy B, Jones L, Larkin PJ et al. Laxatives for the management of con- stipation in people receiving palliative care. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 5: CD003448.
23.	Sridharan K, Sivaramakrishna G. Drugs for treating opioid-induced con- stipation: a mixed treatment comparison network meta-analyses of rand- omised clinical trials. J Pain Symptom Manage 2018; 55: 468–479.
24.	Thomas J, Karver S, Cooney GA et al. Methylnaltrexone for opioid- induced constipation in advanced illness. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 2332–2343.
25.	Clinical Practice Guideline: Bowel Care. King Edward Memorial Hospital, Perth, Western Australia; http://kemh.health.wa.gov.au/devel opment/manuals/O&G_guidelines/sectionc/1/c1.2.pdf (22 November 2017, date last accessed).
26.	Chamberlain BH, Cross K, Winston JL et al. Methylnaltrexone treatment of opioid-induced constipation in patients with advanced illness. J Pain Symptom Manage 2009; 38: 683–690.
27.	Liu M, Wittbrodt E. Low-dose oral naloxone reverses opioid-induced constipation and analgesia. J Pain Symptom Manage 2002; 23: 48–53.
28.	Slatkin N, Thomas J, Lipman AG. Methylnatrexone for treatment of opiod-induced constipation in advanced illness patients. J Support Oncol 2009; 7: 39–46.
29.	Webster L, Dhar S, Eldon M et al. A phase II, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-escalation study to evaluate the safety, efficacy and tolerability of naloxegol in patients with opioid-induced constipa- tion. Pain 2013; 154: 1542–1550.
30.	Katakami N, Oda K, Tauchi K et al. Phase IIb, randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled study of naldemedine for the treatment of opioid- induced constipation in patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35: 1921–1928.
31.	Rauck RL. Treatment of opioid-induced constipation: focus on the per- ipheral l-opioid receptor antagonist methylnaltrexone. Drugs 2013; 73: 1297–1306.
32.	Lee-Robichaud H, Thomas K, Morgan J, Nelson RL. Lactulose versus polyethylene glycol for chronic constipation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 7: CD007570.
33.	Siemens W, Becker G. Methylnaltrexone for opioid-induced constipa- tion: review and meta-analyses for objective plus subjective efficacy and safety outcomes. Ther Clin Risk Manag 2016; 12: 401–412.
34.	Mori M, Yongli J, Kumar S et al. Phase II trial of subcutaneous methylna- trexone in the treatment of severe opioid-induced constipation (OIC) in cancer patients: an exploratory study. Int J Clin Oncol 2017; 22: 397–404.
35.	Bull J, Wellman CV, Israel RJ et al. Fixed dose subcutaneous methylnal- trexone in patients with advanced illness and opioid-induced constipa- tion: results of a randomized, placebo-controlled study and open-label- extension. J Palliat Med 2015; 18: 593–600.
 
36.	Yoon S, Bruner H. Naloxegol in opioid-induced constipation: a new paradigm in the treatment of a common problem. PPA 2017; 11: 1265–1271.
37.	Jones J, Prommer E, Backstedt D. Naloxegol: a novel therapy in the man- agement of opioid-induced constipation. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2016; 33: 875–880.
38.	Chey WD, Webster L, Sostek M et al. Naloxegol for opioid-induced con- stipation in patients with noncancer pain. N Engl J Med 2014; 370: 2387–2396.
39.	Tack J, Lappalainen J, Diva U et al. Efficacy and safety of naloxegol in patients with opioid-induced constipation and inadequate laxative re- sponse. United European Gastroenterol J 2015; 3: 471–486.
40.	Katakami N, Harada T, Murata T et al. Randomized phase III and exten- sion studies of naldemedine in patients with opioid-induced constipa- tion and cancer. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35: 3859–3866.
41.	Meissner W, Leyendecker P, Mueller-Lissner S et al. A randomised con- trolled trial with prolonged-release oral oxycodone and naloxone to pre- vent and reverse opioid-induced constipation. Eur J Pain 2009; 13: 56–64.
42.	Morlion BJ, Mueller-Lissner SA, Vellucci R et al. Oral prolonged-release oxycodone/naloxone for managing pain and opioid-induced constipa- tion: a review of the evidence. Pain Pract 2018; 18: 647–665.
43.	Ahmedzai SH, Leppert W, Janecki M et al. Long-term safety and efficacy of oxycodone/naloxone prolonged release tablets in patients with moderate to severe chronic cancer pain. Support Care Cancer 2015; 23: 823–830.
44.	Amato F, Ceniti S, Mameli S et al. High-dose of fixed combination oxycodone-naloxone prolonged release; efficacy and tolerability in patients with chronic cancer pain. Support Care Cancer 2017; 25: 3051–3058.
45.	Clemens KE, Quednau I, Klaschik E. Bowel function during pain therapy with oxycodone/naloxone prolonged-release tablets in patients with advanced cancer. Int J Clin Pract 2011; 65: 472–478.
46.	Cuomo A, Russo G, Esposito G et al. Efficacy and gastrointestinal toler- ability of oral oxycodone-naloxone combination for chronic pain in out- patients with cancer: an observational study. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2014; 31: 867–876.
47.	De Santis S, Borghesi C, Ricciardi S et al. Analgesic effectiveness and tol- erability of oral oxycodone-naloxone and pregabablin in patients with lung cancer and neuropathic pain: an observational analysis. Ott 2016; 9: 4043–4052.
48.	Dupoiron D, Stachowiak A, Loewenstein O et al. A phase III randomized controlled study on the efficacy and improved bowel function of prolonged-release (PR) oxycodone-naloxone (up to 160/80 mg daily) vs oxycodone PR. Eur J Pain 2017; 21: 1528–1537.
49.	Dupoiron D, Stachowiak A, Loewenstein O et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of oxycodone-naloxone prolonged-released formulation (up to 180/90 mg daily) - results of the open-label extension phase of a phase III multicenter, multiple-dose, randomized, controlled study. Eur J Pain 2017; 21: 1485–1494.
50.	Lazzari M, Greco MT, Marcassa C et al. Efficacy and tolerability of oral oxycodone and oxycodone/naloxone combination in opioid-na¨ıve can- cer patients: a propensity analysis. Drug Des Dev Ther 2015; 9: 5863–5872.
51.	National Clinical Effectiveness Committee. Management of constipation in adult patients receiving palliative care. National Clinical Guideline No. 10, 2015; http://health.gov.ie/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Constipation V9forweb.pdf (20 February 2018, date last accessed).
52.	Clark K, Currow DC, Talley NJ. The use of digital rectal examinations in palliative care inpatients. J Palliat Med 2010; 13: 797.
53.	Remes-Troche JM, Rao SS. Diagnostic testing in patients with chronic constipation. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2006; 8: 416–424.
54.	Hui D, Bruera E. The Edmonton Symptom Assessment 25 years later: past, present and future developments. J Pain Symptom Manage 2017; 53: 630–643.
55.	Hannon B, Dyck M, Pope A et al. Modified Edmonton Symptom Assessment system including constipation and sleep: validation in outpa- tients with cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage 2015; 49: 945–952.
 
56.	Stiel S, Pastrana T, Balzer C et al. Outcome assessment instruments in palliative and hospice care – a review of the literature. Support Care Cancer 2012; 20: 2879–2893.
57.	Bausewein C, Le Grice C, Simon S et al. The use of two common pallia- tive outcome measures in clinical care and research; a systematic review of POS and STAS. Palliat Med 2011; 25: 304–313.
58.	Ho F, Lau F, Downing MG, Lesperance M. A reliability and validity study of the Palliative Performance Scale. BMC Palliat Care 2008; 7: 10.
59.	Lau F, Downing M, Lesperance M et al. Use of the Palliative Performance Scale in end-of-life prognostication. J Palliat Med 2006; 9: 1066–1075.
60.	Groenvold M, Petersen MA, Aaronson NK et al. The development of EORTC-QLQ-C15-PAL: a shortened questionnaire for cancer patients in palliative care. Eur J Cancer 2006; 42: 55–64.
61.	Downing GM, Kuziemsky C, Lesperance M et al. Development and reli- ability testing of the Victoria Bowel Performance Scale (BPS). J Pain Symptom Manage 2007; 34: 513–522.
62.	Argoff CE, Brennan MJ, Camilleri M et al. Consensus recommendations on initiating prescription therapies for opioid-induced constipation. Pain Med 2015; 16: 2324–2337.
63.	Connolly M, Larkin PJ. Managing constipation: a focus on care and treatment in the palliative setting. Br J Community Nurs 2012; 17: 60, 62–64, 66–67.
64.	Kane PM, Ellis-Smith CI, Daveson BA et al. Understanding how a palliative-specific patient-reported outcome intervention works to facili- tate patient-centred care in advanced heart failure: a qualitative study. Palliat Med 2018; 32: 143–155.
65.	Chen J, Ou L, Hollis SJ. A systematic review of the impact of routine col- lection of patient reported outcome measures on patients, providers and health organisations in an oncologic setting. BMC Health Serv Res 2013; 13: 211–235.
66.	Nagaviroj K, Yong WC, Fassbender K et al. Comparison of the Constipation Assessment Scale and plain abdominal radiography in the assessment of constipation in advanced cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 2011; 42: 222–228.
67.	Clark K, Currow DC. Plain abdominal radiographs to diagnose constipa- tion in patients with advanced progressive illness? J Pain Symptom Manage 2011; 41: e2–e3.
68.	Marthey L, Mateus C, Mussini C et al. Cancer immunotherapy with anti- CTLA-4 monoclonal antibodies induces an inflammatory bowel disease. J Crohns Colitis 2016; 10: 395–401.
69.	Brandt LJ, Prather CM, Quigley EM et al. Systematic review on the man- agement of chronic constipation in North America. Am J Gastroenterol 2005; 100(Suppl 1): S5–S21.
70.	McClurg D, Hagen S, Hawkins S, Lowe-Strong A. Abdominal massage for the alleviation of symptoms in people with multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled feasibility study. Mult Scler 2011; 17: 223–233.
71.	McClurg D, Hagen S, Jamieson K et al. Abdominal massage for the allevi-
ation of the symptoms of constipation in people with Parkinson’s: a randomised controlled pilot study. Age Ageing 2016; 45: 299–303.
72.	Coggrave M, Norton C, Cody JD. Management of faecal incontinence and constipation in adults with central neurological diseases. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 1: CD002115.
73.	Niv G, Grinberg T, Dickman R et al. Perforation and mortality after cleansing enema for acute constipation are not rare but are preventable. Int J Gen Med 2013; 6: 323–328.
74.	Rentea RM, Fehring CH. Rectal colonic mural hematoma following enema for constipation while on therapeutic anticoagulation. J Surg Case Rep 2017; 2017: rjx001.
75.	Obokhare I. Fecal impaction: a cause for concern? Clin Colon Rectal Surg 2012; 25: 53–58.
76.	Hussain ZH, Whitehead DA, Lacy BE. Fecal impaction. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2014; 16: 404.
77.	Serrano Falco´n B, Barcelo´  Lo´pez M, Mateos Mun~oz B et al. Fecal impac- tion: a systematic review of its complications. BMC Geriatr 2016; 16: 4.
78.	Peate I. How to perform digital removal of faeces. Nurs Stand 2016; 30: 36–39.
 
79.	Wald A, Scarpignato C, Mueller-Lissner S et al. A multinational survey of prevalence and patterns of laxative use among adults with self-defined constipation. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2008; 28: 917–930.
80.	Choung RS, Locke GR, 3rd, Schleck CD et al. Cumulative incidence of chronic constipation: a population-based study 1988-2003. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2007; 26: 1521–1528.
81.	Whitehead WE, Drinkwater D, Cheskin LJ et al. Constipation in the eld- erly living at home. Definition, prevalence, and relationship to lifestyle and health status. J Am Geriatr Soc 1989; 37: 423–429.
82.	Chassagne P, Ducrotte P, Garnier P, Mathiex-Fortunet H. Tolerance and long-term  efficacy  of  polyethylene  glycol  4000  (ForlaxVR )  compared  to lactulose in elderly patients with chronic constipation. J Nutr Health Aging 2017; 21: 429–439.
83.	Pappagallo M. Incidence, prevalence, and management of opioid bowel dysfunction. Am J Surg 2001; 182(5A Suppl): 11S–18S.
84.	Holzer P, Ahmedzai SH, Niederle N et al. Opioid-induced bowel dys- function in cancer-related pain: causes, consequences, and a novel ap- proach for its management. J Opioid Manage 2018; 5: 145–151.
85.	Talley NJ. Serotoninergic neuroenteric modulators. Lancet 2001; 358: 2061–2068.
86.	Haim N, Epelbaum R, Ben-Shahar M et al. Full dose vincristine (without 2-mg dose limit) in the treatment of lymphomas. Cancer 1994; 73: 2515–2519.
 
87.	Hwu WJ, Krown SE, Panageas KS et al. Temozolomide plus thalidomide in patients with advanced melanoma: results of a dose-finding trial. J Clin Oncol 2002; 20: 2610–2615.
88.	Ford AC, Suares NC. Effects of laxatives and pharmacological therapies in chronic idiopathic constipation: systematic review and meta-analysis. Gut 2011; 60: 209–218.
89.	Leung L, Riutta T, Kotecha J, Rosser W. Chronic constipation: an evidence-based review. J Am Board Fam Med 2011; 24: 436–451.
90.	Twycross R, Sykes N, Mihalyo M, Wilcock A. Stimulant laxatives and opioid-induced constipation. J Pain Symptom Manage 2012; 43: 306–313.
91.	Hurdon V, Viola R, Schroder C. How useful is docusate in patients at risk for constipation? A systematic review of the evidence in the chronic- ally ill. J Pain Symptom Manage 2000; 19: 130–136.
92.	Gondouin A, Manzoni P, Ranfaing E et al. Exogenous lipid pneumonia: a retrospective multicentre study of 44 cases in France. Eur Respir J 1996; 9: 1463–1469.
93.	Christensen P, Bazzocchi G, Coggrave M et al. A randomized controlled trial of transanal irrigation versus conservative bowel management in spinal cord-injured patients. Gastroenterology 2006; 131: 738–747.
94.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
