
 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
 
Annals of Oncology 29 (Supplement 4): iv143–iv165, 2018 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy147
Published online 10 July 2018
 

 

 

S. H. Bush1,2,3,4, P. G. Lawlor1,2,3,4, K. Ryan5,6,7, C. Centeno8,9,10, M. Lucchesi11, S. Kanji2,12, N. Siddiqi13,14,
A. Morandi15, D. H. J. Davis16, M. Laurent17,18, N. Schofield19, E. Barallat20 & C. I. Ripamonti21, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Division of Palliative Care, Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa;  2Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa; 3Bruye`re Research Institute,  Ottawa; 4Bruye`re Continuing Care, Ottawa, Canada; 5Department of Palliative Medicine, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin; 6St Francis Hospice, Dublin; 7School of Medicine, University College, Dublin, Ireland; 8Department of Palliative Medicine, University of Navarra Hospital, Pamplona; 9Palliative Medicine Group, Oncology Area, Navarra Institute for Health Research IdiSNA, Pamplona; 10ATLANTES Research Program, Institute for Culture and Society (ICS), University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; 11Division of Thoracic Oncology, Cardio-Thoracic Department, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; 12Department of Pharmacy, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Canada; 13Department of Health Sciences, Hull York Medical School, University of York, York; 14Bradford District Care NHS Foundation Trust, Bradford, UK; 15Department of Rehabilitation, Aged Care Unit, Ancelle Hospital, Cremona, Italy; 16MRC Unit for Lifelong Health and Ageing at University College London, London, UK; 17Internal Medicine and Geriatric Department, APHP, Henri-Mondor Hospital, Cre´teil; 18University Paris Est (UPE), UPEC A-TVB DHU, CEpiA (Clinical Epidemiology and Aging) Unit EA 7376, Cre´teil, France; 19Let’s Respect, London, UK; 20Faculty of Nursing, Department of Nursing and Physiotherapy, University of Lleida, Lleida, Spain; 21Department of Onco-Haematology Fondazione IRCCS, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: April 2018.


 

Delirium is a neurocognitive syndrome that commonly occurs in older populations and people with cancer, particularly in those with advanced disease and in the last hours or days of life. While an underlying malignancy and its complications predispose a person to develop delirium, many of the treatments used in the management of cancer also increase the risk of delirium [1]. In addition to being associated with an increased risk of mortality and causing significant physical morbidity, delirium is often a se- verely distressing experience, not only for patients, but also for families and professional caregivers [1].
The target population for this European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) is adults with cancer who are at risk of delirium or have been diagnosed with delirium. The intended users for this CPG are healthcare professionals working in the field of oncology, in order to inform both clinical decisions and standards of care.


 
The incidence of delirium in advanced cancer patients has been reported as varying greatly [2], with up to 88% of patients devel- oping delirium in the last weeks to hours of life [3]. This variation depends on the study population, the delirium definition and method of assessment used and staff training, as well as delirium
 

subtype and methods used for subtype classification. In clinical settings, physicians and nurse specialists continue to underdiag- nose delirium [4–8]. The hypoactive subtype is not only the most frequent delirium clinical subtype in patients with cancer [9–11] but is also commonly missed by the oncology team [4]. Combining the assessments of palliative care physicians and nurses has been shown to improve the detection of delirium in terminal cancer patients [9].
The majority of studies in oncological populations examine de- lirium in advanced cancer patients admitted to palliative care units (PCUs) or inpatient palliative care consultation services [4, 9, 12–17] and do not include cancer survivors (see Supplementary Table S1, available at Annals of Oncology online). There is limited published in- formation regarding the frequency of delirium in outpatients with advanced cancer [2]. The authors’ literature review found one study in an outpatient setting [18]: six out of the 69 (8.6%) patients (aged 33–70 years) with head and neck cancer and receiving outpatient treatment developed delirium, based on assessment with the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM). However, 45% of their caregivers reported delirium retrospectively as part of a subsequent mixed-methods study. The literature review found one study of 243 patients presenting to an emergency department [10].
The reported prevalence of delirium is dependent on the patient setting: ~10% of advanced cancer patients presenting to an emer- gency department [8], 43% on admission to a general medical
 


VC   The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
ward [10] and up to 42% on admission to a PCU [12, 17]. During hospitalisation, 16.5% [19] to 18% [20] of patients with cancer or a haematological malignancy admitted to oncology or internal medicine units developed delirium and 26%–47% developed it after admission to an acute PCU (APCU) [9, 12, 13, 15, 17]. Most studies confirm that the frequency of delirium increases with age
[5, 9, 20]. At the end of life, ~90% of patients who died in an APCU had delirium [12] (Supplementary Table S1, available at
Annals of Oncology online, provides more detailed information on the prevalence and incidence of delirium in admitted patients with cancer, and frequency of different delirium subtypes when reported).


 
Outcomes of delirium in the general hospital population have been examined in systematic reviews; delirium is associated with increased post-discharge mortality [hazard ratio 2.0; 95% confi- dence interval (CI): 1.5–2.5] and institutionalisation [odds ratio (OR) 2.4; 95% CI: 1.8–3.3] [21]. Estimates in oncological popula- tions vary widely because samples are drawn from a range of clin- ical contexts and settings [22]. Nonetheless, associations between delirium and adverse outcomes are evident in patients with can- cer to an even greater extent.

Mortality
A number of studies report the association of delirium with mor- tality (see Supplementary Table S2, available at Annals of Oncology online). Mainly conducted in APCUs, all studies except two [23, 24] reported associations between delirium and increased mortality rates of at least twofold. The highest estimate was in a sample undergoing bone marrow transplant (OR 14) [25]. The association is consistent when considering both in- patient and post-discharge mortality. The delirium-mortality as- sociation was still observed where crude estimates were adjusted for covariates including age, sex and cancer type. In cancer patients in the last months of life, shorter survival is associated with the hypoactive and mixed delirium subtypes [26].
Prognostic tools for predicting survival in terminally ill cancer patients, such as the Palliative Prognostic Index (PPI) and In- hospital Mortality Prediction in Advanced Cancer Patients (IMPACT) model, include delirium as a variable [27, 28]. The Palliative Prognostic (PaP) score was recently updated with the incorporation of delirium (D-PaP score) as a significant variable in predicting survival [29].

Morbidity
There are wider effects on general health as a consequence of delirium, though this has not been studied systematically in on- cology populations. Extrapolating from older people (aged ≥ 65 years) admitted to a hospital rehabilitation unit, delirium
increases rehabilitation needs [30] and may be complicated by pressure sores and aspiration pneumonia [31] and significantly higher rates of residential or nursing home placement in the 2 years following admission [32]. Other studies have shown that functional decline is more common following delirium [33–35], along with higher rates of readmission [36]. Overall, these
 
associations are more pronounced in patients with underlying dementia [37]. In patients admitted to an APCU, more severe de- lirium is associated with lower performance status, greater symp- tom burden and longer length of stay [15]. Delirium also causes significant psychological distress for patients, their families and healthcare providers [1]. (See also the section on the ‘Experiential impact of delirium’ for further discussion of this topic.)


 
Risk factors for delirium are often described as ‘predisposing’ or ‘precipitating’. ‘Predisposing’ factors refers to those conditions that already exist in a person at baseline, and increase the person’s susceptibility to develop delirium, whereas ‘precipitating’ factors are those that are responsible for activating a specific delirium episode. Direct and indirect risk factors and other predisposing comorbidities for delirium in the cancer patient are summarised in Table 1. As delirium is ubiquitous, it is possible that cancer sur- vivors with no active disease but who have developed cognitive impairment due to the effects of cancer and/or its treatment may also be at risk for developing delirium. None of the papers that were reviewed for the epidemiology section (see Supplementary Table S1, available at Annals of Oncology online) reported on can- cer survivors.
Studies in oncology settings have not documented specific socio-demographic and disease-related predictive factors for de- lirium. In addition, most studies in cancer patients have explored a range of psychiatric diagnoses rather than addressing factors specific to delirium. As a consequence, the number of patients with delirium in these studies has often been insufficient to pre- cisely determine associated risk factors.
A multifactorial model for hospitalised patients aged ≥ 70 - years has been proposed [5]. The model involves the interaction
between ‘baseline vulnerability’ and ‘precipitating factors or insults’. Predisposing factors that are specifically demonstrated to be contributory to the baseline vulnerability in older patients in- clude visual impairment, severity of illness, pre-existing cognitive impairment and dehydration (demonstrated by an elevated
blood urea nitrogen/creatinine ratio of ≥ 18). Patients who have high baseline vulnerability may develop delirium with any pre-
cipitating factor, whereas those with low baseline vulnerability will be more resistant to the development of delirium, even with noxious insults. Accordingly, in less advanced cancer, relatively minor intercurrent illness can result in delirium in older, frail persons [38], whereas more severe acute illness might be neces- sary to produce delirium in younger individuals.
In a prospective observational study over a 10-week period, 113 patients (145 hospital admissions) with haematological malignan- cies or cancer were admitted to an acute oncology unit. The major- ity of patients (57%) had a haematological malignancy, most
commonly lymphoma (n ¼ 47). For patients with cancer, the stage was not reported. The five factors associated with the occurrence of
delirium on multivariate analysis were found to be: advanced age, cognitive impairment on admission, hypoalbuminaemia, presence of bone metastases (independent of serum calcium level) and the diagnosis of a haematological malignancy [20]. From a retrospect- ive study of 574 patients with solid malignancies and 1733 admis- sions to a medical oncology ward, Neefjes et al. recently developed
 
Table 1. Risk factors and predisposing comorbidities implicated in the onset of delirium in adult patients with cancer
 	
Direct risk factors for delirium

Cancer related-factors [20] Primary CNS tumours Secondary CNS tumours
–	Brain metastases
–	Meningeal metastases
Para-neoplastic neurological syndromes

Toxicities from anticancer treatments [20, 39, 48]
Radiation to brain: acute or delayed encephalopathy
Chemotherapy: methotrexate, cisplatin, vincristine, procarbazine, aspara- ginase, cytarabine (cytosine arabinoside), 5-ﬂuorouracil, ifosfamide, tamoxifen (rare), etoposide (high-dose), nitrosourea compounds, alky- lating agents (high-dose or arterial route)
 
Indirect risk factors for delirium

Physical complications in cancer patients [40, 41]
Metabolic encephalopathy due to hepatic, renal or pulmonary failure Electrolyte abnormalities, including SIADH
Glucose abnormalities
Infections, sepsis—at any site, including intravenous lines Haematological abnormalities
Nutritional deﬁciency
–	Thiamine (vitamin B1)
–	Folic acid (vitamin B9)
–	Cobalamin (vitamin B12) Dehydration
Post-seizure; nonconvulsive status epilepticus Vasculitis
Medications [5, 45] Anxiolytics, hypnotics Opioids Corticosteroids NSAIDs
Anticonvulsants Anticholinergics
–	Scopolamine (hyoscine hydrobromide)
–	Atropine
–	Belladonna alkaloids
–	Drugs with established anticholinergic activity, e.g. tricyclic antidepressants, diphenhydramine, promethazine, trihexyphenidyl, hyoscine butylbromide
Other psychoactive: antipsychotics, antidepressants, levodopa, lithium Anti-infectives: ciproﬂoxacin, acyclovir, ganciclovir
Histamine H2 blockers Omeprazole
Immunomodulators: interferon, interleukins, ciclosporin Medication polypharmacy
Other status or predisposing comorbidities [5, 39]
Age > 70 years
Pre-existing cognitive impairment, e.g. dementia History of delirium
Hearing impairment
Continued
 



a delirium prediction algorithm [39]. They identified that patients admitted as an emergency in combination with a metabolic dis- turbance had a one in three delirium risk. Cancer stage was not recorded, except for the presence of intracranial disease (as pri- mary tumour or metastasis) in 36 patients (6%). Study limitations include a low overall incidence of delirium (3.5 per 100 admis- sions) and retrospective design. Other delirium risk factors have been implicated in other studies, including age, dementia, depres- sion, alcohol abuse, poor functional status, organ dysfunction and abnormal levels of serum sodium, potassium or glucose, among others [40–44]. Moreover, many medications are implicated as risk factors for delirium, in particular opioids, benzodiazepines, corticosteroids and antipsychotics [45] (Table 1). In a study of 140 hospitalised, confused adult cancer patients, 31% had a single de- terminant factor for their delirium, whereas 69% had multiple fac- tors, with a median of three probable causes [46]. One-hundred and two patients (73%) were known to have metastatic cancer, with brain or leptomeningeal metastases present in 36 patients (25%). Contributory precipitants of delirium included: medica- tions (predominantly opioids) in 64% of patients, electrolyte dis- turbance in 46% and infections in 46% [46]. These cited factors may be considered as indirect risk factors in the multifactorial aeti- ology of cancer-related delirium (Table 1).
Considering direct tumour effects, cognitive compromise is often one of the most common presentations of brain and lepto- meningeal metastases [47]. Para-neoplastic encephalitis, which can be associated with anti-neuronal antibodies (such as anti-Hu and others), is a potential rare cause of delirium [47]. With respect to direct effects of cancer-specific treatments, varying levels of cogni- tive impairment have been reported in association with treatment with both chemotherapy and radiotherapy [48–51] (Table 1).
The distinction between predisposing and precipitating factors for delirium in advanced-stage cancer becomes somewhat more arbitrary than in earlier stages of the disease as a result of the multifactorial aetiology of delirium and the overall comorbidity burden [12, 20]. Nonetheless, in analysing the causes of delirium, it is important to recognise that many precipitating risk factors are common and potentially reversible in patients with advanced malignant disease.
 
Table 2. Clinical features of deliriuma (derived from [55, 58, 69, 171–174])

 
Prodromal features
(often single symptoms)
 
e.g. anxiety, restlessness, irritability, disorientation, sleep disturbances
 

Cognitive disturbance	e.g. impaired attention and awareness (with a change from baseline), impairment of consciousness, disturbance in level of arousal, disorientation to environment (time, place) or self (person), reduced concentration, disor- ganised thought process, impaired immediate recall and recent memory, visuospatial dysfunction, language disturbance, incoherent speech
Perceptual disturbance and delusions	Examples of perceptual disturbances: hallucinations (usually visual or tactile), illusions, misinterpretations
—	Delusions that tend to be transient in nature
Psychomotor disturbance	— Hypoactive delirium: reduced psychomotor activity with reduced movement, lethargic, decreased ﬂow of
speech
—	Hyperactive delirium: increased psychomotor activity with agitation, restlessness, increased ﬂow of speech, enhanced startle reaction
—	Mixed delirium: unpredictable, ﬂuctuating features of both hypoactive and hyperactive delirium
Sleep–wake cycle disturbance	e.g. insomnia, distressing dreams and nightmares, reversal of sleep–wake cycle, nocturnal worsening of
symptoms, excessive daytime somnolence

Emotional disturbance	e.g. anxiety, fear, irritability, emotional lability, euphoria, depression, apathy, withdrawal
(Person with delirium may call out, scream or moan)

Neurological abnormality	e.g. asterixis, tremor, myoclonus, frontal release signs (palmomental, snout, grasp reﬂexes), dysgraphia, construc- tional apraxia, dysnomic aphasia
Timeline	— Usually rapid development, over a period of hours to a few days
Fluctuation of severity during a 24-h period, often increasing in the evening and night time
b
—	Lasting around 1 week in hospitalised patients (excluding actively dying patients)

aSpeciﬁc diagnostic criteria are codiﬁed by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) [55] and International Classiﬁcation of Diseases (ICD) [58] classiﬁcation systems.
bThis is dependent on the reversibility of precipitating factor(s), and thus can vary. Symptoms can persist, particularly in older patients.





 
  Clinical assessment, diagnosis and  

 
 
In many patient settings, delirium is often missed [5], in part due to fluctuation of symptoms and hypoactive presentation, and also due to misdiagnosis as another psychiatric disorder. In older people, the diagnosis of delirium superimposed on a pre-existing dementia is particularly challenging. The clinical features of delir- ium are shown in Table 2. Despite its prevalence in patients with cancer, delirium is frequently not recognised by the primary team in inpatient oncology units [4, 52] and may be misdiagnosed by oncologists in up to 37% of their patients [53].
A number of strategies to improve delirium recognition have been suggested, including the use of diagnostic tools and the introduction of routine screening and severity monitoring. For all patient settings, obtaining a collateral history from family members is often invaluable, along with use of the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE)— short form [54] where indicated (see Figure 1). This section reports the current evidence on the clinical assessment, diagnosis and screening of delirium in patients with cancer, in addition to the monitoring of delirium severity.
 
Using validated tools to make a diagnosis of delirium in cancer patients
The reference standard for the diagnosis of delirium is a careful clinical assessment of the patient using Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) [55–57] or International Classification of Diseases (ICD) [58] criteria. This takes time and requires expertise and training. The current version of the DSM criteria, DSM-5, was published in 2013 as the 5th edition and specifies a disturbance in attention and awareness as an essential diagnostic feature of delirium [55] (The ICD-11 revised version is expected to be published in 2018).
Although a variety of tools have been developed to help clini- cians make an accurate diagnosis of delirium, few validation studies have been carried out in representative populations of people with cancer or have included sufficient medical diagnostic detail to allow a determination of whether people with cancer were included in the study (see Supplementary Tables S3 and S4, available at Annals of Oncology online).
The CAM is a copyrighted instrument and one of the most wide- ly used diagnostic instruments for clinical and research purposes with proven psychometric properties [59]. The CAM was
 

 
Figure 1. Assessment and management strategy of delirium in adults (18 years or older) with cancer.
aInsufﬁcient evidence of beneﬁt/harm in this patient population.
bSee Table 3.
cClinical re-evaluation of patient to exclude other causes of agitation, e.g. unrelieved pain, full bladder. dAvoid AP or use with caution in patients with Parkinson’s disease or dementia with Lewy bodies. eMonitor for effectiveness of AP in reducing patient distress and delirium symptoms.
fMonitor for adverse effects of AP, e.g. EPSEs (including dystonia, akathisia and parkinsonism).
gIncreased risk of torsade de pointes, ventricular ﬁbrillation and sudden cardiac death if QTc interval > 500 ms or an increase of	60 ms from baseline.
hRefer to ESMO Palliative Sedation CPG [168].
AP, antipsychotic; BDZ, benzodiazepine; CAM, Confusion Assessment Method; CPG, Clinical Practice Guideline; DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; EPSE, extrapyramidal side effect; ESMO, European Society for Medical Oncology; ICD, International Classiﬁcation of Diseases; QTc interval, rate-corrected QT interval.
Volume 29 | Supplement 4 | October 2018	doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy147 | iv147
 
Table 3. Strategies used in multicomponent non-pharmacological interventionsa for the prevention and management of delirium in older hospitalised non- ICU patients [5, 69, 175]
 

Targeted patient-related risk factors for delirium
 

Strategy
 

Cognitive impairment	Reorientation of patient by staff and family
Explain where they are, who they are, who you are, and your role Use orientation white board, visible clock
Use cognitive stimulating activities, e.g. reminiscence Avoid frequent room changes
Visual impairment	Use eyeglasses and other visual aids

Hearing impairment	Use hearing aids or other portable amplifying devices
Ensure ears are free of impacted wax

Immobility	Encourage active range-of-motion exercises for all patients
Encourage mobilisation as allowed by patient’s performance status, providing walking aids if needed Avoid unnecessary urinary catheterisation
Avoid using physical restraints

Dehydration	Encourage patient to drink, provided they can swallow safely Assist patient at mealtimes if necessary
 
Sleep–wake circadian cycle disturbance
 
Daytime: increase exposure to daylight whenever possible, discourage napping during the day
Evening: warm, non-caffeinated drinks, relaxing music at bedtime, minimise light, noise and disruptions during the night
 

aInterventions include person-centred, tailored and coordinated, multidisciplinary team approaches to care. At this time, there is limited research evidence for these interventions for the prevention and management of delirium in patients with cancer.
ICU, intensive care unit.

 

developed and validated against reference standard ratings of geri- atric psychiatrists that were based on the DSM Third Edition Revised (DSM-III-R) criteria. The CAM diagnostic algorithm is based on four cardinal features of delirium: (1) acute onset and fluctuating course, (2) inattention, (3) disorganised thinking and
(4)	altered level of consciousness. A diagnosis of delirium accord- ing to the CAM algorithm requires the presence of features (1), (2) and either (3) or (4). As part of the assessment, trained healthcare staff should also administer a brief test of cognition, such as the Short Orientation Memory Concentration Test (SOMCT) [60] and attention [for example, to ask the patient to recite the months of the year backwards (MOTYB)]. The CAM training manual for the ‘short’ CAM version was developed to facilitate appropriate use of the instrument and is available online [61], as is the training manual for the comprehensive ‘long’ CAM version.
Shi et al. conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic accuracy in all populations and found that the sensitiv- ity of pooled CAM data was 82% (95% CI: 69%–91%) and the spe- cificity was 99% (95% CI: 87%–100%) [62]. Nevertheless, our search identified only one paper in which the study population described the inclusion of more than 50% of patients with cancer [63]. In this study, the sensitivity was 0.88 (CI: 0.62–0.98) and the specificity was 1.0 (CI: 0.88–1.0). It should be noted that this study is at risk of spectrum bias because participants were inpatients at a PCU and are not representative of the entire cancer population.
Recommendation:
•	The diagnosis of delirium should be made by a trained and competent healthcare professional using a clinical assessment based on DSM or ICD criteria [III, C].
 

O The evidence is insufﬁcient to recommend for or against the routine use of diagnostic tools in making a diagnosis of de- lirium in cancer patients.


Using validated tools to screen for delirium in cancer patients
A variety of screening tools for delirium have been developed. Few validation studies have either been carried out in populations of people with cancer or have included sufficient medical diagnostic detail to allow a determination of whether people with cancer were included in the study. Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies (QUADAS-2) guidelines [64] were employed to assess the study quality of the five studies identified from our systematic lit- erature review [52, 65–68] (see Supplementary Tables S3 and S4, available at Annals of Oncology online). All studies are vulnerable to bias due to spectrum or review bias or use of an inappropriate reference standard.
Recommendations:
•	The evidence is insufﬁcient to recommend the routine use of screening tools in making a diagnosis of delirium in cancer patients [III, C].
O No randomised controlled trials (RCTs) for screening for
delirium in patients with cancer were identiﬁed and so there is no direct evidence that screening for delirium is beneﬁcial or harmful in this patient population.
O While screening potentially offers beneﬁts, universal screen- ing may also pose harms, such as misclassiﬁcation,
 
subsequent treatment of non-delirious patients or failure to accurately identify or intervene in delirious patients.
O However, given the high incidence of delirium in patients with cancer and its associated morbidity and mortality, we recommend that people with cancer who present to hospital should be observed, at least daily, for recent changes or ﬂuc- tuations in cognitive or physical function or behaviour (Table 2). For example, sentinel changes for patients in all clinical settings (inpatient, community and ambulatory) may include the following: impaired concentration, slow responses, withdrawal, sleep disturbances, hallucinations, confusion, agitation, restlessness or mood changes [69].
•	If any changes in cognitive or emotional behaviour or psy-
chomotor activity suggestive of delirium are present, a trained healthcare professional with expertise in evaluating delirium should carry out a clinical assessment to conﬁrm the diagnosis of delirium [III, C].


Using validated tools to routinely rate delirium severity in cancer patients
The literature search identified three studies utilising the Memorial Delirium Assessment Scale (MDAS) and Delirium Rating Scale (DRS) in the assessment of delirium severity in can- cer patients [12, 70, 71] (see Supplementary Table S3, available at Annals of Oncology online).
Recommendation:
•	The evidence is insufﬁcient to recommend for or against the routine use of tools to assess delirium severity in daily prac- tice [III, C].
O No RCTs studying the use of validated delirium severity as-
sessment tools in cancer patients were found to demonstrate whether their use is beneﬁcial or harmful.


Initial evaluation of precipitating risk factors

The rapid detection of delirium and potential risk factors through an appropriate clinical assessment is essential, as studies in patients with advanced cancer show that 20%–50% of delirium episodes can be reversed [12, 16, 72–74] in patients who are not imminently dying (last hours of life). Medication-induced delir- ium is usually reversible, whereas hypoxic encephalopathy and organ failure are associated with non-reversibility [12, 73, 75].
The delirious patient’s capacity to make decisions regarding treatment should be assessed. A functional approach to assess- ment of capacity should be employed, whereby capacity is regarded as issue-specific and time-specific. While capacity is often impaired (and not infrequently absent), the fluctuating na- ture of delirium means that patients may experience periods of lucidity during delirium episodes. As a general principle, efforts should be made to maximise an individual’s capacity wherever possible. Thus, during periods of relative lucidity, delirious patients should be supported to engage in decision making.
 
Depending on the current legislation of an individual country, if a patient is assessed as being unable to engage in decision making about their treatment plan,   healthcare   staff   should determine whether the patient has a pre-existing advance care dir- ective. If valid and applicable, then the advance care directive docu- ment should be used to guide decision making. However, with the onset of delirium in a patient with advanced cancer, it is also critical- ly important that a patient’s preferences for treatments are discussed again after provision of information regarding potential precipitat- ing factors, likelihood of reversal and outcomes. If an advance care directive does not exist, some legal jurisdictions permit a substitute decision maker (SDM) to engage in decision making on the patient’s behalf, with consideration of the patient’s preferences or values regarding treatments. If the patient had previously expressed wishes for no further intervention and treatment, the focus would be solely on symptomatic management of delirium symptoms, with no attempt made to reverse an end-of-life delirium.
Recommendation:
•	For cancer patients whose assessments indicate delirium, identify the predisposing and precipitating factors through a comprehensive initial assessment [III, A].
O A comprehensive initial evaluation should be carried out to
identify and address the precipitating factors, including obtaining the history with corroboration from family or staff, medication review, physical and neurological examin- ation and speciﬁc laboratory tests or imaging, as appropri- ate to the patient’s goals of care.
Figure 2 presents the clinical work-up for identifying potential factors contributing to delirium in cancer patients.

Management of precipitating factors of delirium
A multitude of factors may precipitate delirium in patients with cancer, with a range of one to six precipitating factors for a delirium episode [12] (Table 1). Their investigation and management will be dependent on the specific cause(s) and cancer trajectory, as well as the patient’s goals of care with respect to healthcare interventions (Figure 2). The next section covers those precipitating factors that are particularly pertinent to the oncology patient in more detail.

Management of polypharmacy. This is an extremely important component of patient care that is frequently overlooked in the man- agement of delirium. (See paragraph ‘Deprescribing’ in the section ‘Pharmacological interventions for delirium prevention and treat- ment in adults with cancer’ for more discussion of this topic.)

Opioid rotation or switching. The practice strategy of opioid rota- tion (or switching) is often undertaken if signs of opioid-induced neurotoxicity (OIN) are present, unless the patient is imminently dying [76]. Opioid rotation, where one opioid is substituted for another, may lead to a reduction in the accumulation of neuroex- citatory opioid metabolites from the first opioid while at the same time also improving or maintaining analgesia. However, there remains a lack of high level evidence for this strategy in deli- rious patients [77]: recent systematic reviews found no RCT evi- dence for opioid switching in people with delirium [78, 79].
Several studies report efficacy in association with an opioid switch in delirious cancer patients. In a prospective study of 17 delirious
 


 
Volume 29 | Supplement 4 | October 2018	doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy147 | iv149
 

 
Figure 2. Evaluation* of the adult cancer patient for underlying causes of delirium.
*This should be guided by the patient’s goals of care.
BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CT, computed tomography; EoL, end of life; i.v., intravenous; K, potassium; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; Na, sodium; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PPI, proton pump inhibitor; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion; WBC, white blood cell.

iv150 | Bush et al.	Volume 29 | Supplement 4 | October 2018
 
patients with cancer, delirium and myoclonus were reversed in 80% and 100% of patients, respectively, after opioid switching from transdermal fentanyl to oral methadone [80]. In another prospective study of 20 cancer patients with morphine-induced delirium who had their opioid treatment rotated from morphine to fentanyl, both delirium symptom scores and pain were significantly reduced [81]. Treatment success was obtained in 13/20 patients on day 3 and 18/ 20 patients by day 7 [81]. In a prospective study of 20 cancer patients with uncontrolled pain and postulated ‘terminal delirium’ who underwent opioid rotation to methadone, most patients had at least a short-term improvement in mental status [82].
(See also the section ‘Pharmacological interventions for delir- ium prevention and treatment in adults with cancer’ for more discussion of this topic. The reader is also directed to review the ESMO CPG on ‘Management of cancer pain in adult patients’ for further information [83]).
Recommendation:
•	Opioid rotation (or switching) may be appropriate if signs of OIN are present [V, B].
O A proportion of people develop opioid toxicity, either in as-
sociation with rapidly increasing doses (especially if their cancer pain is poorly responsive to opioids), with an accu- mulation of opioid metabolites caused by renal impairment, rapid tolerance or with sensitivity to opioids. One of the effects of opioid toxicity is delirium; therefore, switching opioids (with a reduction in opioid equianalgesic dose by
~30%–50%) may be useful in alleviating delirium.
Clinically assisted hydration in delirium management. At the pre- sent time, there is limited evidence demonstrating the benefit of clinically assisted hydration in the management of delirium. (See also the section ‘Non-pharmacological interventions for delirium prevention and treatment in adults with cancer’ for evidence regarding hydration and delirium prevention.)
In a multicentre prospective observational study with the pri- mary objective of assessing the quality of life (QoL) of 161 patients with advanced abdominal cancer [74], 4/80 patients (5.3%) who received parenteral hydration of ≥ 1 L/day, as per local guidelines,
developed hyperactive delirium (defined as ≥ 2/3 on the ‘psycho-
motor activity’ item of the MDAS) 48 hours before death, com- pared with 13/56 (17.3%) (P ¼ 0.009) receiving < 1 L/day. Of note, patients receiving ‘large-volume’ hydration developed more bronchial secretions before death [74]. Concerning cancer patients in the last days of life, it is not known whether the systematic hy-
dration of the patient with delirium is beneficial [84].
Recommendation:
•	There is limited research evidence for the role of clinically- assisted hydration in the symptomatic management of delir- ium [V, C].
O  The decision to commence clinically assisted hydration in
delirious patients should be made on a case-by-case basis.
O If in alignment with a patient’s preferences and values, and after a considered evaluation of the possible harms and ben- eﬁts of therapy, clinically assisted hydration may be trialled if dehydration is determined to be a potential precipitating factor for a delirium episode [85, 86].
O Clinically assisted hydration may also be indicated in somno- lent delirious patients who are not drinking, in order to
 
maintain adequate hydration while other clinical interventions are pursued in an attempt to reverse their delirium episode [1].

Management of potentially reversible infections. Infection is a fre- quent precipitating factor for delirium [73]. Seventy percent of patients with bacteraemia have neurological symptoms ranging from lethargy to coma and > 80% have abnormalities on electro- encephalogram [87, 88]. Although it is common practice to treat
the infection associated with delirium, there is no randomised study data to specifically support this practice. In a prospective study of 237 cancer patients admitted to hospice, delirium that was due to an infection and was treated with standard antibiotics had a lower rate of reversibility than delirium related to medica- tions or hypercalcaemia [73].
In delirious patients who are not actively dying from their underlying malignancy and meet the criteria for systemic sepsis, the expert recommendation is that in the absence of an identified source or causative organism, broad-spectrum antibiotics are ne- cessary [89]. The prescribed antibiotics should cover both gram- negative and gram-positive bacteria. A high degree of suspicion for fungal infection as a potential cause of sepsis-associated encephal- opathy is also required. Once a causative organism has been identi- fied, narrowing the spectrum of antibiotics is appropriate [89].
Recommendation:
•	Infection considered to be a precipitating factor for delirium should be treated, if in accordance with a patient’s goals of care and illness trajectory [V, C].
O An outstanding question is whether a time-limited trial of
antibiotics should be undertaken in patients with delirium and no evidence of infection. A prospective cohort study of older medical inpatients with delirium and asymptomatic bacteriuria examined the effect of a test treatment with anti- biotics, hypothesising that a urinary tract infection could be responsible for the clinical picture [90]. The older patients treated in this way obtained worse percentages of functional recovery and a higher incidence of Clostridium difﬁcile infections, questioning the beneﬁt of a time-limited trial of antibiotics in older patients with delirium and asymptomat- ic bacteriuria [90].

Hypercalcaemia. Hypercalcaemia should be suspected when a cancer patient experiences acute or subacute confusion, asthenia or drowsiness, even when they are indolent symptoms. Hypercalcaemia-induced delirium is often reversible (in ~40% of episodes), compared with other underlying causes [73].
However, both hypercalcaemia and delirium are independent negative prognostic factors for survival in cancer patients, with hypercalcaemia often becoming treatment-refractory towards the end of life [91, 92].
Bisphosphonates may efficiently control hypercalcaemia. In two concurrent, parallel, multicentre double-blind RCTs, adult patients with cancer and a corrected serum calcium ≥ 3.00 mmol/L were randomised to receive zoledronic acid in either
a 4-mg dose (n 86), or an 8-mg dose (n 90) administered as a 5-minute intravenous (i.v.) infusion or pamidronate (90 mg) as a 2-hour i.v. infusion [93]. i.v. fluids were given before and during the administration of the study drug. Calcium levels normalised
in ~50% of study participants in the zoledronic acid arms,
 


 
Volume 29 | Supplement 4 | October 2018	doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy147 | iv151
 
compared with 33% in the pamidronate arm by day 4. A complete response (defined as attaining a serum calcium cor- rected for albumin of ≤ 2.70 mmol/L by day 10) occurred in 88.4% of the 4-mg zoledronic acid group, compared with 69.7%
in the pamidronate group (P ¼ 0.002).
Recommendation:
•	Bisphosphonates (such as i.v. pamidronate and zoledronic acid) may control hypercalcaemia and reverse delirium in a substantial number of cases [I, A].
O Parenteral hydration with normal saline not only corrects
hypercalcaemia-associated hypovolaemia, but also pro- motes calciuresis [94].
O If zoledronic acid is used, the 4-mg dose is recommended for the initial treatment of hypercalcaemia, with the 8-mg dose reserved for relapsed or refractory cases [93].
O Denosumab is a human monoclonal antibody and a RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand) inhibitor. This newer agent is a potent inhibitor of bone resorption used in the management of bone metastases and hypercalcae- mia [95]. In an open-label, single-arm, multicentre prospect- ive study of patients with solid tumours or a haematological malignancy and hypercalcaemia refractory to recent i.v. bisphosphonate treatment, subcutaneous (s.c.) denosumab was found to lower serum calcium in 64% (21/33) patients within 10 days [95]. As patients are at increased risk of devel- oping hypocalcaemia after denosumab treatment as com- pared with zoledronic acid, their calcium level should be monitored post-treatment and calcium and vitamin D sup- plements started if necessary [96]. It should be noted that denosumab has United States (US) Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for the management of hypercalcaemia of malignancy (refractory to bisphosphonate therapy) [97], but does not currently have approval for this indication in Europe by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) (the most recent EMA application was withdrawn from consideration in January 2017 [98]).
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion. The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) as a paraneoplastic endocrine phenomenon is most commonly associated with small cell lung cancer but may also occur with other malignancies [99]. SIADH also occurs with many medications, including chemotherapeutic agents such as platinum-based chemotherapy or vinca alkaloids, opioids, non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anticonvulsants and antidepressants, as well as in non-malignant pulmonary and neurological illnesses [100]. Patients with SIADH are clinically euvolaemic with inappropriately high urine osmolality and reduced effective serum osmolality [100]. A diagnosis of SIADH should only be made after excluding other potential causes of hyponatraemia such as adrenal insufficiency [100].
Recommendation:
•	The discontinuation of implicated medications, ﬂuid restric- tion and adequate oral salt intake is recommended for the management of conﬁrmed SIADH [V, C].
O In patients with a short prognosis, strict ﬂuid restriction
may not be appropriate especially if not in keeping with their goals of care with respect to healthcare interventions.
 
O Vasopressin receptor antagonists, such as tolvaptan and con- ivaptan, have also been used in the management of patients with hyponatraemia due to SIADH. Patients require close monitoring in a hospital setting, as it is important to avoid too rapid correction of severe hyponatraemia due to risk of osmotic demyelination syndrome [101]. Hepatotoxicity has been reported with tolvaptan [101].
Hypomagnesaemia. In advanced cancer patients, certain chemo- therapy medications, such as cisplatin or cetuximab, may cause significant hypomagnesaemia [102]. In addition to confusion and hallucinations, other neurological symptoms associated with hypomagnesaemia include irritability, nystagmus, seizures, con- tractures and severe pain [103]. Replacement using i.v. magne- sium sulfate may reverse these symptoms [104].
Recommendation:
•	Magnesium replacement is recommended for the manage- ment of hypomagnesaemia [V, C].
O Recent attention has been drawn to the importance of moni-
toring magnesium levels in cancer patients [105].

Anticancer treatments. Many anticancer treatments can cause pa- tient confusion associated with acute encephalopathy. Delirium may occur more frequently with antineoplastic agents that cross the blood brain barrier, such as capecitabine, topotecan or ifosfa- mide [48, 106]. Most episodes are idiosyncratic and reverse after withdrawal of the offending medication [107]. Novel cancer immunotherapies may cause confusion: the acute release of in- flammatory cytokines is thought to lead to the development of neurological symptoms, which usually resolve when the thera- peutic agent is stopped [108].
Recommendation:
•	Medication or therapy withdrawal is recommended in patients with delirium related to anticancer treatments such as chemotherapy and immunotherapies [V, C].

  Non-pharmacological interventions for  
  delirium prevention and treatment in adults  

 
Non-pharmacological interventions (Table 3) which target delirium risk factors have been recommended for preventing and managing the condition in various clinical practice guidelines, including guid- ance for the care of inpatients in hospitals [69], residents of long- term care institutions [69] and patients in hospices and other pallia- tive care settings [109, 110]. These have been largely based on expert consensus, although there is now considerable evidence from RCTs that multicomponent non-pharmacological interventions are effect- ive in preventing delirium in hospital inpatients, reducing delirium incidence by around one-third [111]. However, the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of these non-pharmacological strategies (as single and multicomponent interventions) in preventing and treating adult patients with cancer is not clear.

Review of the evidence
From a literature search for RCTs on preventing and treating (or managing) delirium in adults with cancer, one completed study of
 
non-pharmacological interventions for delirium prevention was found [112] (see Supplementary Figure S1 and Table S5, available at Annals of Oncology online). Study quality was appraised using the Cochrane risk of bias tool for appraisal of RCTs, and Revman
5.3 software was used to estimate a mean difference between hydra- tion and control groups for the delirium outcome. In addition, the published protocol for an ongoing feasibility cluster RCT of a clin- ically assisted hydration intervention in patients with cancer in the last days of life in hospitals and hospices in the United Kingdom (UK) was retrieved [113]. The primary outcome for this trial is prevalent or incident hyperactive delirium assessed using the modified Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS).
Bruera et al. [112] evaluated the effectiveness of a daily hydra- tion intervention (1 L of saline administered s.c. over 4 hours at home) compared with placebo (100 mL of saline over 4 hours) to 129 hospice patients with advanced cancer in the US. Study par- ticipants were aged 41–92 years, with a median age of 67 years; 47% were female, and there was a diverse range of ethnicities. Baseline delirium was excluded. Delirium was assessed using the MDAS, the RASS and the Nursing Delirium Screening Scale (Nu- DESC). The study found no evidence to support the effectiveness of the hydration intervention on delirium symptoms [at 7 days
from baseline, mean difference in MDAS score ¼ -0.50 (95% CI:
-4.57—3.57); P ¼ 0.81]. There was also no evidence of effect on pain, QoL or survival. The strength of findings was downgraded
to low because of incomplete outcomes data and the relatively small number of study participants.
No completed RCTs of non-pharmacological interventions for the treatment of delirium were found. The ongoing feasibility trial identified did not distinguish between prevention and treatment [113]. Therefore, the scope of the search was expanded to include reports of non-randomised trials of single or multicomponent non- pharmacological interventions for the management of delirium, which identified one additional study [114] (see Supplementary Table S5, available at Annals of Oncology online). In a non- randomised prospective comparative cohort study in 1516 terminal- ly ill cancer patients (without delirium at baseline), Gagnon et al.
[114] evaluated the effectiveness of a multicomponent intervention [comprising structured assessment of risk factors for delirium (including medications), daily orientation of the patient and educa- tion of a family member]. Inpatients at two Canadian palliative care
centres received the intervention (N ¼ 674), with five centres pro- viding ‘usual care’ (N ¼ 842). Compared with usual care, the inter- vention was not effective in preventing delirium, reducing delirium
severity or reducing the number of days with delirium. However, there were a number of substantive methodological limitations, in addition to the lack of randomisation. These include the strong pos- sibility of contamination and delirium misclassification bias, and the variable implementation of the intervention (see also the section ‘Pharmacological interventions for delirium prevention and treat- ment in adults with cancer’).
The striking finding overall is the paucity of high-quality research on non-pharmacological strategies for delirium prevention and treatment in adult patients with cancer. This is despite the consider- able burden of disease attributable to delirium in this population.
Recommendations:
•	For most non-pharmacological interventions for the preven- tion or treatment of delirium in cancer patients, there is no
 
research evidence on which to base recommendations for practice [V, C].
•	Clinically assisted hydration is not more effective than pla- cebo in preventing delirium [II, C].
O There is low-quality evidence from one RCT.


  prevention and treatment in adults with  
 
 
Pharmacological underpinnings

Although it is now recognised that there are potentially many neurotransmitter derangements associated with delirium [115], the cerebral imbalance resulting in a relative excess of dopamin- ergic and deficiency of cholinergic transmission has been one of the main proposed mechanisms in the neuropathogenesis of de- lirium; it has also provided a target mechanism or basis for much of the strategic approach in the pharmacological prevention and treatment of delirium over the past two decades with antipsy- chotics (dopamine D2 receptor antagonists) used historically in delirium management. Other postulated pathophysiological mechanisms of delirium include: cortisol abnormalities, stress re- action, inflammation and cerebral oxidative metabolism distur- bances [1, 115].

Pharmacological interventions for delirium prevention in adults with cancer
The initial literature search identified no studies that met the authors’ inclusion criteria (see Supplementary Figure S2, avail- able at Annals of Oncology online). Of interest, only one study in cancer patients examined, at least in part, a pharmacological preventive strategy [114]. In addition to non-pharmacological interventions (described previously in the section ‘Non- pharmacological interventions for delirium prevention and treat- ment in adults with cancer’), this non-randomised prospective cohort study included a pharmacological risk alert intervention for physicians. The standardised delirium risk alert intervention
focused on three medication categories: (i) opioids, dose > 80 mg of parenteral morphine equivalent per day; (ii) benzodiazepines, dose ≥ 2 mg lorazepam equivalent per day; and (iii) anticholiner- gics, corticosteroids and anticonvulsants intake. The patient’s
attending physician was made aware of these pharmacological risk factors when present. Although the adherence for completion of the risk alert process was 91.2%, the entire multicomponent preventive strategy did not differ from routine care in relation to the incidence, severity or duration of the patient’s first inpatient episode of delirium. In addition to the previously stated study limitations, the degree to which attending physicians specifically adjusted medications or deprescribed on the basis of the risk alert intervention was not reported.

Deprescribing. Deprescribing refers to the systematic process of dose reduction or stopping medications that are potentially harmful or deemed to be no longer beneficial [116]. The strategy of deprescribing has been studied mostly in older patients and
 
less so in patients specifically with cancer, though most cancer patients are in older age groups and polypharmacy is a frequent problem for them [117]. While many literature reports focus on individual drugs for delirium risk, there is also a need to consider the cumulative risk in association with polypharmacy. Polypharmacy is associated with increased anticholinergic bur- den in advanced cancer and likely reflects the increasing use of medications with anticholinergic activity for symptom control in association with advanced disease [118]. Various methods, including rating scales and serum assays, have been developed as measures of anticholinergic activity, but the lack of standardised measures among these methods has hindered study comparison [119]. Studies have examined the association of anticholinergic drug burden exposure with the risk of cognitive decline [120] and, to a lesser extent, delirium, with somewhat conflicting find- ings; the association with delirium was negative in a critical care study [121] and an elderly care study [122], but was positive in two studies in palliative care [123, 124]. A population database study demonstrated a significant association between anticholin- ergic drug burden and the development of an anticholinergic event, including delirium [125]. The Drug Burden Index (DBI) is a validated tool that non-invasively measures exposure not only to anticholinergic but also sedative drug load [126]. A retrospect- ive study in a geriatric medicine setting found that patients with a high DBI were almost three times more likely to be admitted for delirium than those with no DBI exposure [127]. Collectively, despite standardisation shortcomings in relation to the measure of drug anticholinergic burden, studies of polypharmacy (mostly in older patients and to a lesser extent in palliative care) do pro- vide some evidence of a delirium risk in association with anti- cholinergic and sedative drug burden.
Recommendations:
•	Given the absence of studies evaluating pharmacological pre- vention of delirium in cancer patients, no evidence-based rec- ommendations are proposed [V, C].
O  Readers are referred to other published guidelines that
examine the evidence for pharmacological prevention of delirium in adult patients [69].
•	Based on available evidence, deprescribing would appear to
be worthwhile in older patients for many reasons, although there is insufﬁcient data to support this recommendation for all cancer patients from the speciﬁc perspective of delirium prevention [V, B].
O Other beneﬁts of deprescribing in cancer patients include
the identiﬁcation of drug–drug interactions and minimisa- tion of polypharmacy [117, 128].
O Prescribers should also ensure that the inappropriate pre- scribing of medication is avoided.


Pharmacological interventions for delirium treatment in adults with cancer
The literature search and subsequent review yielded 14 studies to inform potential guideline recommendations in relation to pharmacological management of delirium (see supplementary Figure S2 and Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology online). After our search was completed, a relevant RCT was published
[129] and was deemed important to add to our search findings,
 
yielding a total of 15 studies. Of the included studies, three were RCTs [129–131], seven were prospective cohort studies [80, 81, 132–136] and the remaining five were retrospective cohort stud- ies [83, 137–140]. These studies were published between 2000
and 2017, and the study sample sizes ranged from N ¼ 14 to N ¼ 247; this resulted in the cumulative evaluated N ¼ 881. The pharmacological interventions evaluated were antipsychotics (risperidone, N ¼ 4; haloperidol, N ¼ 3; olanzapine, N ¼ 3; que- tiapine, N ¼ 1; aripiprazole, N ¼ 3); a psychostimulant (methyl- phenidate, N ¼ 1); a benzodiazepine (midazolam, N ¼ 1; lorazepam, N ¼ 1); and opioid rotation or switching (fentanyl to methadone, N ¼ 1; morphine to fentanyl, N ¼ 1; various opioids to methadone, N ¼ 1). A total of 843/881 patients (96%) enrolled in these studies had a cancer diagnosis. Of note, it appears that
the aripiprazole groups in the three retrospective studies by Boettger et al. [137, 138, 140] are the same across all three studies (N ¼ 21) but for the purpose of this review, these studies are described separately.
Of the three RCTs, the smallest one (Kim et al.; N ¼ 32; 72% with a cancer diagnosis) compared risperidone with olanzapine
over a 7-day period; dose titration was allowed, and a rater-blind study design was used [130]. The blinded severity ratings were conducted using a validated tool. All patients showed a statistical- ly significant improvement from baseline and there was no sig- nificant difference in either efficacy or adverse effects between risperidone and olanzapine. Approximately one in three and one in five patients in each treatment group experienced daytime somnolence and extrapyramidal side effects (EPSEs), respective- ly. The second study (Hui et al.) was a single-centre, double- blind, parallel group RCT conducted in adult patients with advanced cancer who were admitted to an APCU at a tertiary can- cer centre in the US and had developed delirium [diagnosed according to DSM Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR) criteria] and had a RASS score of 2 (i.e. ‘agitated’) in the pre- vious 24 hours despite scheduled haloperidol [129]. Once enrolled, patients started a standardised open-label regimen of haloperidol 2 mg i.v. every 4 hours and 2 mg every 1 hour as needed for ‘agitation’, at the discretion of the clinical team (attending physician and bedside nurse). If a patient’s monitored
RASS score was ≥ þ2 (this threshold was changed to a RASS score of ≥ þ1 after the study had been recruiting for 7 months), they were then randomised to receive i.v. 3 mg lorazepam fol- lowed by 2 mg haloperidol (N ¼ 29), or a placebo and 2 mg halo- peridol (N ¼ 29). After haloperidol dose standardisation, only 58/90 randomised patients developed further agitation requiring
the blinded intervention. The primary study outcome was the RASS score assessed 8 hours after the intervention medications, with a greater reduction in the lorazepam/haloperidol arm of -4.1 points from baseline RASS score compared with -2.3 points in placebo/haloperidol arm. The mean difference in the RASS score between the two groups (95% CI) was -1.9 points (-2.8 to -0.9,
P < 0.001). The third study (Agar et al.) was a large three-armed, placebo controlled multicentre trial (N    247; 88% with a cancer
diagnosis) conducted in 11 inpatient hospice or hospital pallia- tive care services that compared age-adjusted and titratable doses of risperidone and haloperidol with a placebo control [131]. There were no statistically significant differences among the three groups at baseline, including symptom severity scores on either the MDAS or the Nu-DESC. The study was conducted over a
 
72-hour period with relative change in specific target symptom se- verity scores (inappropriate communication or behaviour or per- ceptual disturbance, as rated by nurses) as primary outcome. Compared with placebo, treatment with either risperidone or halo- peridol was associated with higher delirium symptom severity scores and more EPSEs. As a secondary outcome, haloperidol treatment was associated with poorer overall survival in long-term follow-up.
Of the seven prospective cohort studies (N 210 patients in total), six had no active comparator medication; study compari- sons were made on a longitudinal, before-versus-after basis in terms of delirium symptom severity measures [80, 81, 132–135]. Improvement compared with baseline was demonstrated in two studies for olanzapine: response rates were 76% at day 7 [132] and 38% at day 3 [134] for oral and s.c. administered olanzapine, re- spectively. Improvement was also demonstrated for oral risperi- done with a 48% response rate (a 25% reduction in delirium severity scores) at day 7 and mild sedation occurred in one patient [135]. In a study of morphine-associated delirium, an opioid
switch to fentanyl resulted in a day 7 response (MDAS score < 10) rate of 90% [81]. Similarly, in transdermal fentanyl-associated de-
lirium, 4/5 (80%) patients had a resolution of delirium by 7 days following an opioid switch to methadone [80]. Daily methylphen- idate administration for hypoactive delirium with no delusional or perceptual disturbance and no identifiable underlying cause for delirium was associated with cognitive improvement in all 14 patients [133]. The remaining prospective cohort study compared aggregate delirium severity responses with short (quetiapine) versus long (haloperidol, risperidone and olanzapine) half-life antipsychotics and broader multi-acting receptor-targeted anti- psychotics (MARTAs: olanzapine and quetiapine) versus narrower non-MARTAs (haloperidol and risperidone) [136]. Compared with baseline, there was improvement in MDAS scores at day 3 in all medication groups, but only the short-acting and MARTAs groups continued to show a statistically significant improvement at day 7 of treatment.
Of the five retrospective cohort studies (N ¼ 302 patients in total), three had no active comparator medication and study
comparisons were made on a longitudinal, before-versus-after basis in terms of delirium symptom severity measures [82, 137, 139]; the remaining two studies used case-matched controls who were receiving haloperidol [138, 140]. In the management of opioid-associated delirium, a switch to methadone resulted in improved delirium symptom scores after 48 hours, as reflected by
> 50% reduction in their mean baseline MDAS score [82]. In three separately reported studies from the same centre, patients
treated with aripiprazole over 7 days showed improvement of de- lirium symptoms, as reflected by > 50% reduction in mean MDAS scores compared with baseline [137, 138, 140]. When compared with similar patients treated with haloperidol, risperi- done and olanzapine, aripiprazole treatment was associated with
no difference in efficacy but fewer adverse events [138, 140]. A study using an algorithmic protocol for routine practice that specified initial 5 mg doses of both haloperidol and midazolam administered intramuscularly, and subsequent adjusted s.c. doses administered at 30-minute intervals depending on response, reported an improvement in delirium symptoms when compared with baseline in 91% of 584 episodes occurring in 135 (9%) of their patient PCU admissions for whom the protocol was deemed necessary [139]. The reported improvement was subjective on
 
the part of healthcare providers, as there was no report of a stand- ardised tool used to assess delirium severity. Transient sedation was reported without a frequency estimate.
Methodological issues such as small sample size, selection and misclassification bias were identified with many of the studies included in our review. However, the major methodological con- cern is the absence of a comparator placebo arm in many studies examining pharmacological interventions for delirium symptom management. The reversibility of delirium in a PCU has been reported to be as high as 50% following the standard recom- mended approach of treating reversible precipitating factors [12]. In the absence of a placebo arm, the improvements in delir- ium noted in a cohort study may be explained by a response to treatment of the delirium episode’s precipitants rather than a re- sponse to an antipsychotic. One of the included RCTs was the first study to examine pharmacological management of delirium symptoms in (mainly) cancer patients, albeit that most had advanced disease [131]. This study clearly demonstrated no bene- fit with risperidone or haloperidol in the relief of distressing tar- get symptoms of delirium; in fact, these symptoms were worse with both of the antipsychotics than with placebo. Remarkably, no patients in this study had severe delirium, which limits the generalisability of study findings in relation to the severe episodes of delirium that can occur in cancer patients, especially in the context of advanced disease. Nonetheless, the findings of this study are consistent with similar studies that failed to demon- strate a beneficial role for haloperidol or antipsychotics in general in the pharmacological management of delirium in critical care [141, 142]. Three recent systematic reviews (one relating solely to haloperidol) and two meta-analyses of the pharmacological man- agement of delirium in hospitalised patients have also concluded that there is insufficient or no clear evidence to support haloperi- dol or antipsychotics in general in either the prevention or treat- ment of delirium [111, 143, 144].
Recommendations:
•	Opioid rotation (or switching) to fentanyl or methadone is an efﬁcacious strategy in the context of opioid-associated de- lirium [V, B].
O  The standard approach to opioid-associated delirium in
clinical practice is to reduce the dose or switch to a differ- ent opioid (with a reduction in opioid equianalgesic dose by 30%–50%) [145].
•	Administration of either haloperidol or risperidone has no
demonstrable beneﬁt in the symptomatic management of mild-to-moderate delirium and is not recommended in this context [I, D].
O In clinical practice, it may be difﬁcult to clearly categorise de-
lirium as mild or moderate, especially since delirium by its very nature tends to ﬂuctuate in its presenting symptoms. As haloperidol and risperidone are not beneﬁcial in cancer patients with mild-to-moderate delirium [131], and have been shown to worsen symptoms, by logical extension it can be argued that these medications will also likely not be of beneﬁt and may be harmful in delirium categorised as severe. Further trials of antipsychotics in severe delirium, including subgroup analyses in relation to different precipitating fac- tors, phenomenology and symptom expression, are required to conﬁrm this, but based on emerging data and systematic
 
reviews, it is suggested that these concerns relate to both older and newer generation antipsychotics as a class.
•	Administration of olanzapine may offer beneﬁt in the symp-
tomatic management of delirium [III, C].
•	Administration of quetiapine may offer beneﬁt in the symp- tomatic management of delirium [V, C].
•	Administration of aripiprazole may offer beneﬁt in the symp- tomatic management of delirium [IV, C].
O Olanzapine, quetiapine and aripiprazole appear less likely to
be associated with EPSEs than ﬁrst generation antipsy- chotics. Quetiapine is available in oral formulations only for acute management, while olanzapine and aripiprazole are also available in parenteral or orally dispersible formulations in some countries. Sedation is a well-recognised side effect of olanzapine and quetiapine, which may be advantageous in patients with hyperactive delirium.
•	Methylphenidate may improve cognition in hypoactive delir-
ium in which neither delusions nor perceptual disturbance are present and for which no cause has been identiﬁed [V, C].
•	Benzodiazepines are effective at providing sedation and po- tentially anxiolysis in the acute management of severe symp- tomatic distress associated with delirium [II, C].
O Although midazolam and other benzodiazepines are used very
extensively in palliative care for multiple reasons, they are not considered part of the initial strategy in delirium management. This is because benzodiazepines are sedating, have been iden- tiﬁed as deliriogenic and, in those with some functional mobil- ity, are associated with a clear risk of falls. The clinical decision to use midazolam or lorazepam as a crisis interven- tion in delirium management (particularly in patients who are agitated and regardless of whether they are already on an anti- psychotic), must involve an assessment of the level of patient distress; the safety risks with and without administering ben- zodiazepines; and patient mobility. However, benzodiazepines do have a role as ﬁrst-line agents in the management of alco- hol or benzodiazepine withdrawal.
Practice point: the use of pharmacological interventions in the management of delirium in adults should be limited to patients who have distressing delirium symptoms (such as perceptual dis- turbances) or if there are safety concerns where the patient is a potential risk to themselves or others. In order to achieve the ap- propriate balance between benefit and potential harm, medica- tions should be used in the lowest effective dose and for a short period of time only (see Table 4 and Figure 1).

Experiential impact of delirium

A delirious patient may experience strong emotions, feel anxious and threatened and present as verbally and physically aggressive or withdrawn [1, 146]. Vivid hallucinations or illusions may provoke overwhelming fear. Patients often feel a lack of control, in addition to sensing that they are not being listened to or understood [1].
Delirium causes significant distress. In both quantitative and qualitative studies, cancer patients who have recovered from an episode of delirium confirm that the experience is distressing,
 
even for those with hypoactive delirium [147–149]. Family mem- bers may feel helpless and distressed, especially if observing agi- tated behaviours and hallucinations or if having difficulty communicating with the patient at the time of the delirium epi- sode [147–152], with their distress continuing into bereavement [146]. Caring for an agitated delirious patient is also distressing for oncology and palliative care nursing staff [7, 147, 153]. In addition to being provided information about delirium, patients may require a more formal opportunity to debrief after the delir- ium episode has resolved [1]. Nurses and other members of the healthcare team should be offered a formal team debriefing ses- sion after challenging cases [7].


Informational and support needs for the family
Symptoms of delirium (see Table 2), including cognitive, per- ceptual and emotional disturbances, can dominate the clinical picture, causing high levels of emotional distress for families observing often sudden and profound behavioural and psycho- logical disturbances in their loved ones. As a patient approaches the final days and hours of life, the consequent difficulty that families have in maintaining communication and relationships with those experiencing delirium may compound self-reported feelings of helplessness, inadequacy, despair and anger at the sense of ‘loss’ of the person before their physical death [152, 154].
Significant improvements in delirium and the management of symptoms are possible—even at the end of life, helping to reduce distress for the patient, their family and staff [155]. Usually close to the bedside for extended periods of time, families are also uniquely placed to observe and report changes that may indicate the occurrence of delirium, offering clinicians the opportunity for prompt intervention. Families may also assist in delivering non-pharmacological interventions [156].
Most families will have limited prior knowledge or experience of delirium in advanced cancer. This lack of understanding can worsen their distress, especially, for example, when they incor- rectly assume that a particular delirium episode has been caused by medication or unmanaged pain [149, 155]. Information about delirium given in the form of a leaflet/brochure designed for relatives can improve understanding and preparedness, thus ameliorating at least some distress and increasing the compe- tence and confidence of families to respond in this situation [155, 157]. If delirium develops, studies further suggest that supplementing the provision of written information with edu- cational and psychological support for families from suitably prepared nursing and other healthcare staff is maximally effect- ive [149, 154, 158].
Recommendations:
•	While not all patients with cancer will develop delirium, we recommend that relatives have access to information about delirium pre-emptively and at repeated intervals, especially if the patient’s condition is declining due to disease progression. This information should also be disseminated to the wider family who are likely to visit [V, A].
•	If delirium develops, written information should be supple- mented with educational and psychological support for fami- lies by suitably trained staff [V, A].
 
Table 4. Pharmacological interventions that may have a role in the management of delirium symptoms in adult patients (derived from [101, 171, 176–178])

Medication	Suggested starting dose	Comments

 
First-generation antipsychotics
Haloperidol	0.5–1 mg p.o. or s.c. stat.
PRN dose: 0.5 or 1 mg p.o. or s.c. q1h PRN (give q8h–q12h if scheduled dosing required)
Use lower doses in older or frail patients, e.g. 0.25–
0.5 mg, and titrate gradually
Can also be given i.v. (need ECG monitoring) and i.m.
 

May cause EPSEs
Do not use if patient has Parkinson’s disease or dementia with Lewy bodies due to risk of EPSEs
May prolong QTc interval
 

 
Methotrimeprazine (Levomepromazine)
 
5–12.5 mg p.o. or s.c. stat.
PRN dose: 5–12.5 mg p.o./s.c. q2h PRN
(Give q8h–q12h if scheduled dosing required)
Use lower doses in older or frail patients, e.g. 2.5 mg, and titrate gradually
Can also be given by deep i.m. injection
 
Sedating, anticholinergic effects
May cause EPSEs, orthostatic hypotension, paradoxical agitation
s.c. injection may cause irriation
(In some countries, tablet available in 6-mg dose, rather than 5 mg)
 

Chlorpromazine	12.5–25 mg p.o. or p.r. stat.
(Give q6h–q12h if scheduled dosing required) In older patients, use doses in the lower range
Use with caution in patients with renal and hepatic impairment
Can also be given slow i.v. (diluted) or i.v. infusion, deep
i.m. injection
 

Sedating, anticholinergic effects
May cause EPSEs, orthostatic hypotension May prolong QTc interval
Parenteral use may cause local irritation
 

 
Second-generation antipsychotics
Olanzapine	2.5–5 mg p.o. or s.c. stat.
(If scheduled dosing required, start with 2.5–5 mg p.o. or
s.c. daily—usually at bedtime)
Reduce dose in older patients and patients with hepatic impairment
Available as ODT
Can also be given i.m.
 

May cause drowsiness, orthostatic hypotension Metabolic effects (long-term use)
(Caution: combining with benzodiazepine as risk of oversedation and respiratory depression)
 

 
Quetiapine	25 mg (immediate release) p.o. stat. (Give q12h if scheduled dosing required)
Reduce dose in older patients and patients with hepatic impairment
Oral route only
 
Sedating
Less likely to cause EPSEs than another atypical AP May cause orthostatic hypotension, dizziness
 

 
Risperidone	0.5 mg p.o. stat.
(Give up to q12h if scheduled dosing required)
Reduce dose in older patients and patients with severe renal or hepatic impairment
Available as ODT Oral route only
 
Increased risk of EPSEs if dose > 6 mg/24 h
May cause insomnia, agitation, anxiety, drowsiness, ortho- static hypotension
 

Third-generation antipsychotics
Aripiprazole	5 mg p.o. or i.m. (immediate-release) stat (Give q24h if scheduled dosing required)
Reduce dose in older patients and in poor metabolisers of cytochrome P450 2D6
Available as ODT and oral solution

Benzodiazepines
 


Less likely to cause EPSEs
May cause headache, agitation, anxiety, insomnia, dizziness, drowsiness
(Caution: cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 drug–drug interactions; consult pharmacist/pharmacy references for further details)
 
Treatment of choice as monotherapy for alcohol or benzodiazepine withdrawal
 
[Caution: in patients with severe pulmonary insufﬁ- ciency, severe liver disease, myasthenia gravis (unless using in imminently dying patient)]
 
(Caution: fatalities have been reported with concurrent use of benzodiazepines with high-dose olanzapine)



Continued
 


 
Volume 29 | Supplement 4 | October 2018	doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy147 | iv157
 
Table 4. Continued
Medication	Suggested starting dose	Comments

 
Midazolam	2.5 mg s.c. or i.v. q1h PRN (up to 5 mg maximum)
Use lower doses in older or frail patients or in patients with COPD, or if co-administered with an AP,
e.g. 0.5–1 mg s.c./i.v. q1h PRN Can also be given i.m.
 
Increased risk of falls
May cause delirium, drowsiness, dizziness, paradoxical agitation, anxiety, insomnia
May have a role as a crisis medication in the management of delirious patients with severe agitation and distress
 

Lorazepam	1 mg s.c. or i.v. stat. (up to 2 mg maximum)
Use lower doses in older or frail patients or in patients with COPD, or if co-administered with an AP,
e.g. 0.25–0.5 mg s.c./i.v. q1h PRN Can also be given p.o., s.l.
 

Increased risk of falls
May cause delirium, drowsiness, paradoxical agitation
s.c. injection may cause irritation
May have a role as a crisis medication in the management of delirious patients with severe agitation and distress
 

At this time, there is limited research evidence for the use and dosing of these medications for the management of delirium in patients with cancer. Antipsychotics and benzodiazepines can themselves cause increased patient agitation and delirium.
Short-term use of medications in the lowest effective dose (e.g. antipsychotics or benzodiazepines) may have a role in delirium management if the patient has perceptual disturbances (e.g. hallucinations, illusions), or if the patient is severely agitated and is a potential risk to themselves or others. Medications for delirium symptom management should be initially started on a PRN (as needed) basis. Regular (or scheduled) dosing may be required for persistent dis- tressing delirium symptoms and should be given for the shortest period of time possible.
The reader should note that no medication is currently licenced for use (worldwide) in the management of delirium. Availability of formulations and doses may vary according to individual countries. While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of this text and medication doses, please also consult a pharmacist and/or pharmacy references and the manufacturer’s Summary of Product Characteristics when prescribing these medications.
AP, antipsychotic; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ECG, electrocardiogram; EPSE, extrapyramidal side effect; i.m., intramuscular; i.v., intraven- ous; ODT, oral disintegrating tablet; p.o., oral; p.r., per rectum; PRN, when required; QTc interval, rate-corrected QT interval; qXh, every X hours; s.c., subcuta- neous; s.l., sublingual; stat., immediately.


 
Recommended content of leaflet/brochure on delirium:
•	A deﬁnition of delirium, specifying causes, symptoms, evolu- tion and management.
•	An explanation of the ﬂuctuating nature of delirium, e.g. periods of confusion may alternate with periods of lucidity.
•	Guidance on appropriate responses and non-pharmacological interventions that may be helpful.
Educational needs of nurses and other members of the healthcare team
In a cross-sectional questionnaire study of 88 Japanese oncology nurses following a 1.5-hour training session of cancer patients’ men- tal health needs, 57% reported feeling very or extremely concerned about assessing for delirium and 66% felt very or extremely con- cerned about caring for delirious patients [159]. As a component of a large cross-sectional questionnaire survey (79% response rate) of 3008 nurses caring for oncology patients in Japan, the Palliative Care Self-Reported Practices Scale scored low for delirium care [160]. Nurses may be uncertain regarding how to assess and best manage a patient’s delirium, and may feel isolated on evening and night shifts [7]. As a result, nurses have reported a need to improve their delir- ium knowledge and assessment [7, 153].
In an RCT of 96 Japanese oncology nurses (with a waiting list control group) [161], 50 participants in the intervention group received a 16-hour psycho-oncology training program, which included delirium and suicidal ideation in addition to the topics of patients’ normal and distress reactions to cancer. Knowledge, self- reported confidence and attitude scales were completed pre- intervention and 3 months post-intervention as a mailed survey.
 
There was significant improvement in both the knowledge and con- fidence scores in the intervention group, but not in attitudes. No ef- fect was found on the secondary outcomes: work-related distress and burnout.
In a repeated-measures evaluation of a 2-hour delirium educa- tion session delivered to 23 registered nurses, followed by the im- plementation of a delirium protocol on a 24-bed inpatient oncology unit in the US, delirium knowledge increased from 69% pre-test to 86% post-test, and 81% at 11 months [162]. Nurses’ confidence in managing delirious patients increased from 47% to 66%, rising to 69% at 11 months.
A systematic review of interprofessional delirium education studies concluded that combining interprofessional education interventions with interprofessional clinical practice activities or procedures may improve patient outcomes and healthcare team performance [163].
Recommendation:
•	Interprofessional delirium education interventions should be a core component of an interprofessional unit- or hospital-wide strategy to improve the recognition, assessment and manage- ment of delirium by the whole healthcare team [II, A].


Management of refractory delirium in the	
actively dying patient	
In the dying phase, delirium is usually refractory. For ongoing distressing delirium-related agitation in the final hours, days or
 
Table 5. Summary of recommendations

Clinical assessment, diagnosis and screening
•	The diagnosis of delirium should be made by a trained and competent healthcare professional using a clinical assessment based on DSM or ICD criteria [III, C]
•	The evidence is insufﬁcient to recommend the routine use of screening tools in making a diagnosis of delirium in cancer patients [III, C]
•	If any changes in cognitive or emotional behaviour or psychomotor activity suggestive of delirium are present, a trained healthcare professional with expertise in evaluating delirium should carry out a clinical assessment to conﬁrm the diagnosis of delirium [III, C]
•	The evidence is insufﬁcient to recommend for or against the routine use of tools to assess delirium severity in daily practice [III, C]
Management of potentially reversible causes of the delirium episode
•	For cancer patients whose assessments indicate delirium, identify the predisposing and precipitating factors through a comprehensive initial assess- ment [III, A]
•	Opioid rotation (or switching) may be appropriate if signs of OIN are present [V, B]
•	There is limited research evidence for the role of clinically assisted hydration in the symptomatic management of delirium [V, C]
•	Infection considered to be a precipitating factor for delirium should be treated, if in accordance with a patient’s goals of care and illness trajectory [V, C]
•	Bisphosphonates (such as i.v. pamidronate and zoledronic acid) may control hypercalcaemia and reverse delirium in a substantial number of cases [I, A]
•	The discontinuation of implicated medications, ﬂuid restriction and adequate oral salt intake is recommended for the management of conﬁrmed SIADH [V, C]
•	Magnesium replacement is recommended for the management of hypomagnesaemia [V, C]
•	Medication or therapy withdrawal is recommended in patients with delirium related to anticancer treatments such as chemotherapy and immuno- therapies [V, C]
Non-pharmacological interventions for delirium prevention and treatment in adults with cancer
•	For most non-pharmacological interventions for the prevention or treatment of delirium in cancer patients, there is no research evidence on which to base recommendations for practice [V, C]
•	Clinically assisted hydration is not more effective than placebo in preventing delirium [II, C]
Pharmacological interventions for delirium prevention and treatment in adults with cancer
•	Given the absence of studies evaluating pharmacological prevention of delirium in cancer patients, no evidence-based recommendations are pro- posed [V, C]
•	Based on available evidence, deprescribing would appear to be worthwhile in older patients for many reasons, although there is insufﬁcient data to
support this recommendation for all cancer patients from the speciﬁc perspective of delirium prevention [V, B]
•	Opioid rotation (or switching) to fentanyl or methadone is an efﬁcacious strategy in the context of opioid-associated delirium [V, B]
•	Administration of either haloperidol or risperidone has no demonstrable beneﬁt in the symptomatic management of mild-to-moderate delirium and is not recommended in this context [I, D]
•	Administration of olanzapine may offer beneﬁt in the symptomatic management of delirium [III, C]
•	Administration of quetiapine may offer beneﬁt in the symptomatic management of delirium [V, C]
•	Administration of aripiprazole may offer beneﬁt in the symptomatic management of delirium [IV, C]
•	Methylphenidate may improve cognition in hypoactive delirium in which neither delusions nor perceptual disturbance are present and for which no cause has been identiﬁed [V, C]
•	Benzodiazepines are effective at providing sedation and potentially anxiolysis in the acute management of severe symptomatic distress associated
with delirium [II, C]

Experiential impact of delirium, support and education
•	While not all patients with cancer will develop delirium, we recommend that relatives have access to information about delirium pre-emptively and at repeated intervals, especially if the patient’s condition is declining due to disease progression. This information should also be disseminated to the wider family who are likely to visit [V, A]
•	If delirium develops, written information should be supplemented with educational and psychological support for families by suitably trained staff [V, A]
•	Interprofessional delirium education interventions should be a core component of an interprofessional unit- or hospital-wide strategy to improve the recognition, assessment and management of delirium by the whole healthcare team [II, A]

DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; ICD, International Classiﬁcation of Diseases; i.v., intravenous; OIN, opioid-induced neurotoxicity; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion.


 
1–2 weeks of life, pharmacological sedative management in the form of palliative sedation may be required [76]. A systematic re- view by Maltoni et al. reported that refractory delirium is the most frequent indication for palliative sedation [164]. Further re- search is needed on the efficacy of palliative sedation on symptom control and QoL [165]. After careful assessment by the
 
interprofessional team and/or specialist palliative care team before commencement, the level of prescribed medication for palliative sedation should be proportionate to the severity of the intractable symptom(s), and frequently monitored using a tool such as the RASS [166] or the palliative version, the RASS-PAL [167]. Families require increased support and information from
 
Table 6. Summary of recommendations for future research
•	To examine methods of improving delirium detection in cancer patients by all members of the healthcare team (including physicians, nurses, allied health and family caregivers) across clinical care settings
•	To examine the validity of delirium diagnostic tools in the cancer population and the clinical effectiveness and harms and the cost-effectiveness of
such tools
•	To conduct validation studies of delirium screening tools in the cancer population across clinical care settings
•	To conduct RCTs exploring the clinical effectiveness and harms and the cost-effectiveness of delirium screening in the cancer population across different care settings
•	To evaluate the role of delirium severity assessment in daily clinical practice
•	To examine the association between delirium duration and outcomes in the cancer population
•	To develop and validate delirium risk prediction models for incident delirium in oncology patients
•	To develop and validate delirium prediction models for treatment response/reversibility of delirium in patients with advanced cancer
•	To conduct randomised trials to evaluate the practices of opioid rotation (switching to opioids other than fentanyl and methadone) and of clinically assisted hydration in delirious patients
•	To undertake studies of ‘deprescribing’ in the cancer population to evaluate its potential role in the prevention of delirium
•	To conduct robust and adequately powered RCTs of non-pharmacological multicomponent interventions targeting speciﬁc risk factors for delirium in cancer patients in addition to environmental and social contributing factors. These RCTs should be designed to assess comparative effectiveness and harms, achieve the target sample size and incorporate blinding of outcome assessors
•	To undertake mixed methods studies to inform the optimal approach to implementation of often complex non-pharmacological multicomponent
interventions
•	Undertake economic evaluations to determine the cost-effectiveness of non-pharmacological multicomponent interventions in resource-constrained healthcare settings
•	To conduct prospective RCTs examining both the pharmacological prevention and treatment of delirium in patients with a cancer diagnosis. These
studies should incorporate a placebo group to establish effectiveness and safety before comparative efﬁcacy studies are conducted
•	To conduct studies that evaluate the role of levomepromazine (methotrimeprazine), an antipsychotic that is commonly used by the subcutaneous route in palliative care for the management of agitated delirium at the end of life. Further research is required to examine the efﬁcacy and harms of levomepromazine, as the authors’ literature search did not ﬁnd any published studies that addressed this issue
•	To conduct studies of novel pharmacotherapeutic agents such as melatonin, which may have a role in preventing and treating delirium in cancer
patients given the evidence supporting such use in other populations and settings
•	To conduct studies examining the optimal pharmacological management of severe refractory delirium in patients dying with advanced cancer
•	To perform laboratory studies to better elucidate the complex neuropathogenesis of delirium and thus better guide the ultimate pharmacological targeting of pivotal neurotransmitter pathways and their receptors

RCT, randomised controlled trial.


 
the healthcare team during this time. (See also the ESMO CPG for the management of refractory symptoms at the end of life and the use of palliative sedation [168]).
 
with a focus on the multidisciplinary non-pharmacological preven- tion and treatment of delirium in adults with cancer, particularly adults ≥ 65 years old and in non-perioperative settings, are urgently needed.
 

 
 
A summary of recommendations is shown in Table 5. In addition, the Guideline Development Group (GDG) made several recom- mendations for future research (see Table 6). As age is a signifi- cant risk factor for delirium, important considerations for future research are the association of cancer with older age groups and the projected demographic changes with an increasing elderly proportion of the population. Thus, in designing delirium re- search studies, the challenges of recruitment and the high rate of attrition in this often-frail population are important issues to ad- dress to avoid inadequately powered trials.
As there are usually multiple factors contributing to a delirium episode in any cancer patient, further research is needed to establish the effectiveness of multiple interventions across healthcare settings: hospitals, palliative care or hospice inpatient units and community. Many studies for multicomponent, non-pharmacological interven- tions in older adults have been conducted in other settings. Studies
 

 
Delirium is a clinical emergency and an index of acute change in a patient’s medical condition. The effective recognition, assess- ment and management of an episode of delirium hinges on vigi- lance and commitment by the whole healthcare team. Although reversal of delirium may not always be possible or desirable, symptomatic management, primarily with non-pharmacological strategies should be made available to all patients and supple- mented with pharmacological intervention if necessary. Psychological support should also be made available to all patients and their families.
For many of the domains reviewed by the GDG, the level of evi- dence was low; hence, the linked grade of recommendation was not strong. In addition, no evidence was found for most non- pharmacological interventions for the prevention or treatment of delirium in cancer patients. There is an urgent need for adequately
 

 

 
powered and robust clinical trials of non-pharmacological and pharmacological interventions, including RCTs, to improve the prevention and management of this distressing syndrome.


 
This CPG was developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for CPG development http://www.esmo. org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. Levels of evi- dence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 7. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an an- onymous peer review process.
A review of the evidence underpinning each section topic for this CPG was assigned to 1–3 members of the multidisciplinary, core GDG. The literature search varied according to each guide- line section, and included the Cochrane, Ovid Medline, PubMed, Embase, PsycINFO and SCOPUS databases for the years 2000 until May 2017. Relevant studies in cancer patients that were sub- sequently published from June to 19 September 2017 were reviewed on an individual basis by the relevant section authors before inclusion. Databases were searched using relevant subject headings and free-text terms. Study inclusion criteria were:
adults ≥ 18 years old with cancer and either at risk of delirium or with a formal delirium diagnosis; and hospital, inpatient pallia-
tive care/hospice and community settings. Paediatric populations and alcohol withdrawal delirium (delirium tremens) were excluded. For the literature searches for pharmacological preven- tion and treatment and screening and diagnostic tools, studies in
which the study population was comprised of < 50% cancer patients were excluded. Perioperative delirium and intensive or
critical care settings were excluded, as current evidence-based guidelines are available for these populations [169, 170]. Case reports, case series, conference abstracts, reviews, editorials and letters were also excluded.
 
SB coordinated the GDG, led the experiential impact and man- agement of refractory delirium sections, contributed to the non- pharmacological, pharmacological, educational needs, manage- ment of potentially reversible causes and epidemiology sections, edited the remaining sections and drafted the manuscript. PL contributed to pharmacological section and helped to draft the manuscript. KR contributed to delirium diagnosis and screening section and helped to draft the manuscript. CC led the section on management of potentially reversible causes. MLu led the section on risk factors. SK contributed to pharmacological section. NSi led the non-pharmacological section. AM contributed to delir- ium diagnosis and screening section. DD led the section on delir- ium outcomes. MLa led the section on epidemiology. NSc led the section on informational and support needs. EB contributed to the educational needs section. CR is ESMO Subject Editor and assisted with coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

 
Monisha  Kabir,  Research  Administrative  Assistant  at  Bruye`re Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada, for her assistance in the graphic presentation of figures and algorithms, and with the final referencing and formatting of the manuscript and supple- mentary tables and figures. Judy Wright and Rocio Rodriguez- Lopez, Information Specialists at the Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, University of Leeds, UK, for their assistance with developing and carrying out the literature search for the non- pharmacological section.


 
The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.

 
1.	Lawlor PG, Bush SH. Delirium in patients with cancer: assessment, im- pact, mechanisms and management. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2015; 12: 77–92.
 
2.	Kang JH, Shin SH, Bruera E. Comprehensive approaches to managing delirium in patients with advanced cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 2013; 39: 105–112.
3.	Hosie A, Davidson PM, Agar M et al. Delirium prevalence, incidence, and implications for screening in specialist palliative care inpatient set- tings: a systematic review. Palliat Med 2013; 27: 486–498.
4.	de la Cruz M, Fan J, Yennu S et al. The frequency of missed delirium in patients referred to palliative care in a comprehensive cancer center. Support Care Cancer 2015; 23: 2427–2433.
5.	Inouye SK, Westendorp RG, Saczynski JS. Delirium in elderly people. Lancet 2014; 383: 911–922.
6.	Boyle DA. Delirium in older adults with cancer: implications for prac- tice and research. Oncol Nurs Forum 2006; 33: 61–78.
7.	Hosie A, Agar M, Lobb E et al. Palliative care nurses’ recognition and as- sessment of patients with delirium symptoms: a qualitative study using critical incident technique. Int J Nurs Stud 2014; 51: 1353–1365.
8.	Elsayem AF, Bruera E, Valentine AD et al. Delirium frequency among advanced cancer patients presenting to an emergency department: a pro- spective, randomized, observational study. Cancer 2016; 122: 2918–2924.
9.	Fang CK, Chen HW, Liu SI et al. Prevalence, detection and treatment of delirium in terminal cancer inpatients: a prospective survey. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2008; 38: 56–63.
10.	Uchida M, Okuyama T, Ito Y et al. Prevalence, course and factors asso- ciated with delirium in elderly patients with advanced cancer: a longitu- dinal observational study. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2015; 45: 934–940.
11.	Spiller JA, Keen JC. Hypoactive delirium: assessing the extent of the problem for inpatient specialist palliative care. Palliat Med 2006; 20: 17–23.
12.	Lawlor PG, Gagnon B, Mancini IL et al. Occurrence, causes, and out- come of delirium in patients with advanced cancer: a prospective study. Arch Intern Med 2000; 160: 786–794.
13.	Gagnon P, Allard P, Maˆsse B, DeSerres M. Delirium in terminal cancer: a prospective study using daily screening, early diagnosis and continu- ous monitoring. J Pain Symptom Manage 2000; 19: 412–426.
14.	S¸enel G, Uysal N, Oguz G et al. Delirium frequency and risk factors among patients with cancer in palliative care unit. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2017; 34: 282–286.
15.	Mercadante S, Adile C, Ferrera P et al. Delirium assessed by Memorial Delirium Assessment Scale in advanced cancer patients admitted to an acute palliative/supportive care unit. Curr Med Res Opin 2017; 33: 1303–1308.
16.	Hosie A, Lobb E, AgarM et al. Measuring delirium point-prevalence in two Australian palliative care inpatient units. Int J Palliat Nurs 2016; 22: 13–21.
17.	de la Cruz M, Ransing V, Yennu S et al. The frequency, characteristics, and outcomes among cancer patients with delirium admitted to an acute palliative care unit. Oncologist 2015; 20: 1425–1431.
18.	Bond SM, Dietrich MS, Shuster JL Jr, Murphy BA. Delirium in patients with head and neck cancer in the outpatient treatment setting. Support Care Cancer 2012; 20: 1023–1030.
19.	Gaudreau JD, Gagnon P, Harel F et al. Psychoactive medications and risk of delirium in hospitalized cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 2005; 23: 6712–6718.
20.	Ljubisavljevic V, Kelly B. Risk factors for development of delirium among oncology patients. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2003; 25: 345–352.
21.	Witlox J, Eurelings LS, de Jonghe JF et al. Delirium in elderly patients and the risk of postdischarge mortality, institutionalization, and de- mentia: a meta-analysis. JAMA 2010; 304: 443–451.
22.	Lawlor PG, Davis DHJ, Ansari M et al. An analytical framework for de- lirium research in palliative care settings: integrated epidemiologic, clinician-researcher, and knowledge user perspectives. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 48: 159–175.
23.	Elsayem A, Mori M, Parsons HA et al. Predictors of inpatient mortality in an acute palliative care unit at a comprehensive cancer center. Support Care Cancer 2010; 18: 67–76.
24.	Mori M, Parsons HA, De la Cruz M et al. Changes in symptoms and in- patient mortality: a study in advanced cancer patients admitted to an acute palliative care unit in a comprehensive cancer center. J Palliat Med 2011; 14: 1034–1041.
 
25.	Beglinger LJ, Duff K, Van Der Heiden S et al. Incidence of delirium and associated mortality in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation patients. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2006; 12: 928–935.
26.	Kim SY, Kim SW, Kim JM et al. Differential associations between delir- ium and mortality according to delirium subtype and age: a prospective cohort study. Psychosom Med 2015; 77: 903–910.
27.	Morita T, Tsunoda J, Inoue S, Chihara S. The Palliative Prognostic Index: a scoring system for survival prediction of terminally ill cancer patients. Support Care Cancer 1999; 7: 128–133.
28.	Hui D, Kilgore K, Fellman B et al. Development and cross-validation of the in-hospital mortality prediction in advanced cancer patients score: a preliminary study. J Palliat Med 2012; 15: 902–909.
29.	Scarpi E, Maltoni M, Miceli R et al. Survival prediction for terminally ill cancer patients: revision of the palliative prognostic score with incorp- oration of delirium. Oncologist 2011; 16: 1793–1799.
30.	Morandi A, Davis D, Fick DM et al. Delirium superimposed on demen- tia strongly predicts worse outcomes in older rehabilitation inpatients. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2014; 15: 349–354.
31.	Fong TG, Davis D, Growdon ME et al. The interface between delirium and dementia in elderly adults. Lancet Neurol 2015; 14: 823–832.
32.	Eeles EM, Hubbard RE, White SV et al. Hospital use, institutionalisa- tion and mortality associated with delirium. Age Ageing 2010; 39: 470–475.
33.	Buurman BM, Hoogerduijn JG, de Haan RJ et al. Geriatric conditions in acutely hospitalized older patients: prevalence and one-year survival and functional decline. PLoS One 2011; 6: e26951.
34.	Davis DHJ, Muniz Terrera G, Keage H et al. Delirium is a strong risk factor for dementia in the oldest-old: a population-based cohort study. Brain 2012; 135: 2809–2816.
35.	Marcantonio ER, Simon SE, Bergmann MA et al. Delirium symptoms in post-acute care: prevalent, persistent, and associated with poor func- tional recovery. J Am Geriatr Soc 2003; 51: 4–9.
36.	Marcantonio ER, Kiely DK, Simon SE et al. Outcomes of older people admitted to postacute facilities with delirium. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005; 53: 963–969.
37.	Fong TG, Jones RN, Marcantonio ER et al. Adverse outcomes after hos- pitalization and delirium in persons with Alzheimer disease. Ann Intern Med 2012; 156: 848–856.
38.	Quinlan N, Marcantonio ER, Inouye SK et al. Vulnerability: the cross- roads of frailty and delirium. J Am Geriatr Soc 2011; 59(Suppl 2): S262–S268.
39.	Neefjes ECW, van der Vorst MJDL, Verdegaal BATT et al. Identification of patients with cancer with a high risk to develop delir- ium. Cancer Med 2017; 6: 1861–1870.
40.	Jeejeebhoy NK. Malnutrition, fatigue, frailty, vulnerability, sarcopenia and cachexia: overlap of clinical features. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2012; 15: 213–219.
41.	Laird BJ, McMillan DC, Fayers P et al. The systemic inflammatory re- sponse and its relationship to pain and other symptoms in advanced cancer. Oncologist 2013; 18: 1050–1055.
42.	Marcantonio ER, Goldman L, Mangione CM et al. A clinical prediction rule for delirium after elective noncardiac surgery. JAMA 1994; 271: 134–139.
43.	MacDonald N. Terminology in cancer cachexia: importance and status. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2012; 15: 220–225.
44.	Fearon K, Arends J, Baracos V. Understanding the mechanisms and treat- ment options in cancer cachexia. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2013; 10: 90–99.
45.	Caraceni A. Drug-associated delirium in cancer patients. EJC Suppl 2013; 11: 233–240.
46.	Tuma R, DeAngelis LM. Altered mental status in patients with cancer. Arch Neurol 2000; 57: 1727–1731.
47.	Weitzner MA, Olofsson SM, Forman AD. Patients with malignant men- ingitis presenting with neuropsychiatric manifestations. Cancer 1995; 76: 1804–1808.
48.	Matsuoka H, Yoshiuchi K, Koyama A et al. Chemotherapeutic drugs that penetrate the blood–brain barrier affect the development of hyper- active delirium in cancer patients. Pall Supp Care 2015; 13: 859–864.
 
49.	Vitali M, Ripamonti CI, Roila F et al. Cognitive impairment and chemotherapy: a brief overview. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2017; 118: 7–14.
50.	O’Farrell E, MacKenzie J, Collins B. Clearing the air: a review of our current understanding of “chemo”. Curr Oncol Rep 2013; 15: 260–269.
51.	Greene-Schloesser D, Robbins ME. Radiation-induced cognitive im- pairment - from bench to bedside. Neuro Oncol 2012; 14(Suppl 4): iv37–iv44.
52.	de la Cruz M, Noguera A, San Miguel-Arregui MT et al. Delirium, agita- tion, and symptom distress within the final seven days of life among can- cer patients receiving hospice care. Pall Supp Care 2015; 13: 211–216.
53.	Wada T, Wada M, Wada M, Onishi H. Characteristics, interventions, and outcomes of misdiagnosed delirium in cancer patients. Pall Supp Care 2010; 8: 125–131.
54.	Jorm AF. A short form of the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE): development and cross-validation. Psychol Med 1994; 24: 145–153.
55.	American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington: American Psychiatric Association 2013.
56.	American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR). Washington: American Psychiatric Association 2000.
57.	Meagher DJ, Morandi A, Inouye SK et al. Concordance between DSM- IV and DSM-5 criteria for delirium diagnosis in a pooled database of 768 prospectively evaluated patients using the delirium rating scale- revised-98. BMC Med 2014; 12: 164.
58.	World Health Organization. The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders: clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines, 1992. http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/bluebook.pdf (17 April 2018, date last accessed).
59.	Inouye SK, van Dyck CH, Alessi CA et al. Clarifying confusion: the con- fusion assessment method. A new method for detection of delirium. Ann Intern Med 1990; 113: 941–948.
60.	Katzman R, Brown T, Fuld P et al. Validation of a short orientation- memory-concentration test of cognitive impairment. Am J Psychiatry 1983; 140: 734–739.
61.	Inouye SK. The short confusion assessment method (short CAM): training manual and coding guide: Hospital Elder Life Program, Boston 2014. http://www.hospitalelderlifeprogram.org (17 April 2018, date last accessed).
62.	Shi Q, Warren L, Saposnik G, Macdermid JC. Confusion assessment method: a systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic accuracy. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2013; 9: 1359.
63.	Ryan K, Leonard M, Guerin S et al. Validation of the confusion assess- ment method in the palliative care setting. Palliat Med 2009; 23: 40–45.
64.	Whiting PF, Rutjes AW, Westwood ME et al. QUADAS-2: a revised tool for the quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies. Ann Intern Med 2011; 155: 529–536.
65.	Stillman MJ, Rybicki LA. The bedside confusion scale: development of a portable bedside test for confusion and its application to the palliative medicine population. J Palliat Med 2000; 3: 449–456.
66.	Gaudreau J-D, Gagnon P, Harel F et al. Fast, systematic, and continuous delirium assessment in hospitalized patients: the nursing delirium screening scale. J Pain Symptom Manage 2005; 29: 368–375.
67.	Sands MB, Dantoc BP, Hartshorn A et al. Single question in delirium (SQiD): testing its efficacy against psychiatrist interview, the confusion assessment method and the memorial delirium assessment scale. Palliat Med 2010; 24: 561–565.
68.	Detroyer E, Clement PM, Baeten N et al. Detection of delirium in pallia- tive care unit patients: a prospective descriptive study of the delirium observation screening scale administered by bedside nurses. Palliat Med 2014; 28: 79–86.
69.	National Clinical Guideline Centre. Delirium: diagnosis, prevention and management. Clinical Guideline 103. National Clinical Guideline Centre (NCGC) - Acute and Chronic Conditions, 2010. http://www. nice.org.uk/CG103 (17 April 2018, date last accessed).
 
70.	Grassi L, Caraceni A, Beltrami E et al. Assessing delirium in cancer patients: the Italian versions of the delirium rating scale and the me- morial delirium assessment scale. J Pain Symptom Manage 2001; 21: 59–68.
71.	Noguera A, Carvajal A, Alonso-Babarro A et al. First Spanish version of the memorial delirium assessment scale: psychometric properties, re- sponsiveness, and factor loadings. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 47: 189–197.
72.	Pereira J, Hanson J, Bruera E. The frequency and clinical course of cog- nitive impairment in patients with terminal cancer. Cancer 1997; 79: 835–842.
73.	Morita T, Tei Y, Tsunoda J et al. Underlying pathologies and their asso- ciations with clinical features in terminal delirium of cancer patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 2001; 22: 997–1006.
74.	Yamaguchi T, Morita T, Shinjo T et al. Effect of parenteral hydration therapy based on the Japanese national clinical guideline on quality of life, discomfort, and symptom intensity in patients with advanced can- cer. J Pain Symptom Manage 2012; 43: 1001–1012.
75.	Leonard M, Raju B, Conroy M et al. Reversibility of delirium in termin- ally ill patients and predictors of mortality. Palliat Med 2008; 22: 848–854.
76.	Bush SH, Leonard MM, Agar M et al. End-of-life delirium: issues regarding recognition, optimal management, and the role of sedation in the dying phase. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 48: 215–230.
77.	Keeley P. Delirium at the end of life. Am Fam Physician 2010; 81: 1260–1261.
78.	Dale O, Moksnes K, Kaasa S. European Palliative Care Research Collaborative pain guidelines: opioid switching to improve analgesia or reduce side effects. A systematic review. Palliat Med 2011; 25: 494–503.
79.	Stone P, Minton O. European Palliative Care Research collaborative pain guidelines. Central side-effects management: what is the evidence to support best practice in the management of sedation, cognitive im- pairment and myoclonus? Palliat Med 2011; 25: 431–441.
80.	Ben´ıtez-Rosario MA, Feria M et al. Opioid switching from transdermal fentanyl to oral methadone in patients with cancer pain. Cancer 2004; 101: 2866–2873.
81.	Morita T, Takigawa C, Onishi H et al. Opioid rotation from morphine to fentanyl in delirious cancer patients: an open-label trial. J Pain Symptom Manage 2005; 30: 96–103.
82.	Moryl N, Kogan M, Comfort C, Obbens E. Methadone in the treatment of pain and terminal delirum in advanced cancer patients. Palliat Support Care 2005; 3: 311–317.
83.	Fallon M, Giusti R, Aielli F et al. Management of cancer pain in adult patients: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. Ann Oncol 2018; 29(Suppl 4): iv166–iv191.
84.	Hui D, Dev R, Bruera E. The last days of life: symptom burden and im- pact on nutrition and hydration in cancer patients. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care 2015; 9: 346–354.
85.	Lawlor PG, Bush SH. Delirium diagnosis, screening and management. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care 2014; 8: 286–295.
86.	Nakajima N, Satake N, Nakaho T. Indications and practice of artificial hydration for terminally ill cancer patients. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care 2014; 8: 358–363.
87.	Young GB, Bolton CF, Archibald YM et al. The electroencephalogram in sepsis-associated encephalopathy. J Clin Neurophysiol 1992; 9: 145–152.
88.	Young GB, Bolton CF, Austin TW et al. The encephalopathy associated with septic illness. Clin Invest Med 1990; 13: 297–304.
89.	Gofton TE, Young GB. Sepsis-associated encephalopathy. Nat Rev Neurol 2012; 8: 557–566.
90.	Dasgupta M, Brymer C, Elsayed S. Treatment of asymptomatic UTI in older delirious medical in-patients: a prospective cohort study. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2017; 72: 127–134.
91.	Sternlicht H, Glezerman IG. Hypercalcemia of malignancy and new treatment options. Ther Clin Risk Manag 2015; 11: 1779–1788.
92.	Penel N, Dewas S, Hoffman A, Adenis A. Cancer-associated hypercalce- mia: validation of a bedside prognostic score. Support Care Cancer 2009; 17: 1133–1135.
 
93.	Major P, Lortholary A, Hon J et al. Zoledronic acid is superior to pamidronate in the treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy: a pooled analysis of two randomized, controlled clinical trials. J Clin Oncol 2001; 19: 558–567.
94.	Clines GA. Mechanisms and treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 2011; 18: 339–346.
95.	Hu MI, Glezerman IG, Leboulleux S et al. Denosumab for treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014; 99: 3144–3152.
96.	Body JJ, Niepel D, Tonini G. Hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia: find- ing the balance. Support Care Cancer 2017; 25: 1639–1649.
97.	U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Drugs@FDA: FDA Approved Drug Products, 2017. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/ index.cfm (17 April 2018, date last accessed).
98.	European Medicines Agency. Withdrawn applications; Xgeva, 2017. http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?	curl¼pages/medicines/ human/medicines/002173/wapp/Post-authorisation/human_wapp_ 000227.jsp&mid¼WC0b01ac058001d128 (17 April 2018, date last accessed).
99.	Pelosof LC, Gerber DE. Paraneoplastic syndromes: an approach to diag- nosis and treatment. Mayo Clin Proc 2010; 85: 838–854.
100.	Spasovski G, Vanholder R, Allolio B et al. Clinical practice guideline on diagnosis and treatment of hyponatraemia. Eur J Endocrinol 2014; 170: G1–G47.
101.	Lexicomp: Version 3.0.1. Wolters Kluwer Clinical Drug Information, Inc., 2017.
102.	Fakih MG, Wilding G, Lombardo J. Cetuximab-induced hypomagnes- emia in patients with colorectal cancer. Clin Colorectal Cancer 2006; 6: 152–156.
103.	Lo´pez-Saca JM, Lo´pez-Picazo JM, Larumbe A et al. Hypomagnesemia as a possible explanation behind episodes of severe pain in cancer patients receiving palliative care. Support Care Cancer 2013; 21: 649–652.
104.	Schrag D, Chung KY, Flombaum C, Saltz L. Cetuximab therapy and symptomatic hypomagnesemia. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005; 97: 1221–1224.
105.	Centeno C, Lo´pez Saca JM. An update on the importance of monitoring serum magnesium in advanced disease patients. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care 2013; 7: 396–405.
106.	Lo Y, Shen LJ, Chen WH et al. Risk factors of ifosfamide-related en- cephalopathy in adult patients with cancer: a retrospective analysis. J Formos Med Assoc 2016; 115: 744–751.
107.	Nolan MC, DeAngelis LM. The confused oncologic patient: a rational clinical approach. Curr Opin Neurol 2016; 29: 789–796.
108.	Davila ML, Sauter C, Brentjens R. CD19-targeted T cells for hemato- logic malignancies: clinical experience to date. Cancer J 2015; 21: 470–474.
109.	Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health. Guideline on the Assessment and Treatment of Delirium in Older Adults at the End of Life. Toronto: Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health (CCSMH) 2010.
110.	Scottish Partnership for Palliative Care. Scottish Palliative Care Guidelines – Delirium. Scotland: NHS Scotland, Healthcare Improvement Scotland 2014.
111.	Siddiqi N, Harrison JK, Clegg A et al. Interventions for preventing delir- ium in hospitalised non-ICU patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; 3: CD005563.
112.	Bruera E, Hui D, Dalal S et al. Parenteral hydration in patients with advanced cancer: a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 111–118.
113.	Davies A, Waghorn M, Boyle J et al. Alternative forms of hydration in patients with cancer in the last days of life: study protocol for a rando- mised controlled trial. Trials 2015; 16: 464.
114.	Gagnon P, Allard P, Gagnon B et al. Delirium prevention in terminal cancer: assessment of a multicomponent intervention. Psychooncology 2012; 21: 187–194.
115.	Maldonado JR. Neuropathogenesis of delirium: review of current etio- logic theories and common pathways. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2013; 21: 1190–1222.
 
116.	Farrell B, Pottie K, Rojas-Fernandez CH et al. Methodology for develop- ing deprescribing guidelines: using evidence and GRADE to guide rec- ommendations for deprescribing. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0161248.
117.	Leblanc TW, McNeil MJ, Kamal AH et al. Polypharmacy in patients with advanced cancer and the role of medication discontinuation. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: e333–e341.
118.	Agar M, Currow D, Plummer J et al. Changes in anticholinergic load from regular prescribed medications in palliative care as death approaches. Palliat Med 2009; 23: 257–265.
119.	Salahudeen MS, Duffull SB, Nishtala PS. Anticholinergic burden quan- tified by anticholinergic risk scales and adverse outcomes in older peo- ple: a systematic review. BMC Geriatr 2015; 15: 31.
120.	Fox C, Smith T, Maidment I et al. Effect of medications with anti- cholinergic properties on cognitive function, delirium, physical func- tion and mortality: a systematic review. Age Ageing 2014; 43: 604–615.
121.	Wolters AE, Zaal IJ, Veldhuijzen DS et al. Anticholinergic medication use and transition to delirium in critically ill patients: a prospective co- hort study. Crit Care Med 2015; 43: 1846–1852.
122.	Moorey HC, Zaidman S, Jackson TA. Delirium is not associated with anticholinergic burden or polypharmacy in older patients on admission to an acute hospital: an observational case control study. BMC Geriatr 2016; 16: 162.
123.	Zimmerman KM, Salow M, Skarf LM et al. Increasing anticholinergic burden and delirium in palliative care inpatients. Palliat Med 2014; 28: 335–341.
124.	Plaschke K, Petersen KA, Frankenhauser S et al. The impact of plasma cholinergic enzyme activity and other risk factors for the development of delirium in patients receiving palliative care. J Pain Symptom Manage 2016; 52: 525–532.
125.	Salahudeen MS, Nishtala PS, Duffull SB. The influence of patient char- acteristics on anticholinergic events in older people. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord Extra 2016; 5: 530–541.
126.	Wouters H, van der Meer H, Taxis K. Quantification of anticholinergic and sedative drug load with the Drug Burden Index: a review of out- comes and methodological quality of studies. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2017; 73: 257–266.
127.	Best O, Gnjidic D, Hilmer SN et al. Investigating polypharmacy and drug burden index in hospitalised older people. Intern Med J 2013; 43: 912–918.
128.	Riechelmann RP, Zimmermann C, Chin SN et al. Potential drug inter- actions in cancer patients receiving supportive care exclusively. J Pain Symptom Manage 2008; 35: 535–543.
129.	Hui D, Frisbee-Hume S, Wilson A et al. Effect of lorazepam with halo- peridol vs haloperidol alone on agitated delirium in patients with advanced cancer receiving palliative care: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2017; 318: 1047–1056.
130.	Kim SW, Yoo JA, Lee SY et al. Risperidone versus olanzapine for the treatment of delirium. Hum Psychopharmacol 2010; 25: 298–302.
131.	Agar MR, Lawlor PG, Quinn S et al. Efficacy of oral risperidone, halo- peridol, or placebo for symptoms of delirium among patients in pallia- tive care: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2017; 177: 34–42.
132.	Breitbart W, Tremblay A, Gibson C. An open trial of olanzapine for the treatment of delirium in hospitalized cancer patients. Psychosomatics 2002; 43: 175–182.
133.	Gagnon B, Low G, Schreier G. Methylphenidate hydrochloride improves cognitive function in patients with advanced cancer and hypoactive delirium: a prospective clinical study. J Psychiatry Neurosci 2005; 30: 100–107.
134.	Elsayem A, Bush SH, Munsell MF et al. Subcutaneous olanzapine for hyperactive or mixed delirium in patients with advanced cancer: a pre- liminary study. J Pain Symptom Manage 2010; 40: 774–782.
135.	Kishi Y, Kato M, Okuyama T, Thurber S. Treatment of delirium with ris- peridone in cancer patients. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2012; 66: 411–417.
136.	Tanimukai H, Tsujimoto H, Matsuda Y et al. Novel therapeutic strat- egies for delirium in patients with cancer. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2016; 33: 456–462.
 
137.	Boettger S, Breitbart W. An open trial of aripiprazole for the treatment of delirium in hospitalized cancer patients. Pall Supp Care 2011; 9: 351–357.
138.	Boettger S, Friedlander M, Breitbart W, Passik S. Aripiprazole and halo- peridol in the treatment of delirium. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2011; 45: 477–482.
139.	Gonc¸alves F, Almeida A, Pereira S. A protocol for the control of agita- tion in palliative care. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2016; 33: 948–951.
140.	Boettger S, Jenewein J, Breitbart W. Haloperidol, risperidone, olanzapine and aripiprazole in the management of delirium: a comparison of effi- cacy, safety, and side effects. Pall Support Care 2015; 13: 1079–1085.
141.	Page VJ, Ely EW, Gates S et al. Effect of intravenous haloperidol on the duration of delirium and coma in critically ill patients (Hope-ICU): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med 2013; 1: 515–523.
142.	Girard TD, Pandharipande PP, Carson SS et al. Feasibility, efficacy, and safety of antipsychotics for intensive care unit delirium: the MIND randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2010; 38: 428–437.
143.	Schrijver EJ, de Graaf K, de Vries OJ et al. Efficacy and safety of halo- peridol for in-hospital delirium prevention and treatment: a systematic review of current evidence. Eur J Int Med 2016; 27: 14–23.
144.	Neufeld KJ, Yue J, Robinson TN et al. Antipsychotic medication for prevention and treatment of delirium in hospitalized adults: a systemat- ic review and meta-analysis. J Am Geriatr Soc 2016; 64: 705–714.
145.	Indelicato RA, Portenoy RK. Opioid rotation in the management of re- fractory cancer pain. J Clin Oncol 2002; 20: 348–352.
146.	Greaves J, Vojkovic S, Nikoletti S et al. Family caregivers’ perceptions and experiences of delirium in patients with advanced cancer. Aust J Cancer Nurs 2008; 9: 2–10.
147.	Breitbart W, Gibson C, Tremblay A. The delirium experience: delirium recall and delirium-related distress in hospitalized patients with cancer, their spouses/caregivers, and their nurses. Psychosomatics 2002; 43: 183–194.
148.	Bruera E, Bush SH, Willey J et al. Impact of delirium and recall on the level of distress in patients with advanced cancer and their family care- givers. Cancer 2009; 115: 2004–2012.
149.	Cohen MZ, Pace EA, Kaur G, Bruera E. Delirium in advanced cancer leading to distress in patients and family caregivers. J Palliat Care 2009; 25: 164–171.
150.	Morita T, Hirai K, Sakaguchi Y et al. Family-perceived distress from delirium-related symptoms of terminally ill cancer patients. Psychosomatics 2004; 45: 107–113.
151.	Morita T, Akechi T, Ikenaga M et al. Terminal delirium: recommenda- tions from bereaved families’ experiences. J Pain Symptom Manage 2007; 34: 579–589.
152.	Namba M, Morita T, Imura C et al. Terminal delirium: families’ experi- ence. Palliat Med 2007; 21: 587–594.
153.	Brajtman S, Higuchi K, McPherson C. Caring for patients with terminal delirium: palliative care unit and home care nurses’ experiences. Int J Palliat Nurs 2006; 12: 150–156.
154.	Finucane AM, Lugton J, Kennedy C, Spiller JA. The experiences of care- givers of patients with delirium, and their role in its management in pal- liative care settings: an integrative literature review. Psychooncology 2017; 26: 291–300.
155.	Gagnon P, Charbonneau C, Allard P et al. Delirium in advanced cancer: a psychoeducational intervention for family caregivers. J Palliat Care 2002; 18: 253–261.
156.	Martinez FT, Tobar C, Beddings CI et al. Preventing delirium in an acute hospital using a non-pharmacological intervention. Age Ageing 2012; 41: 629–634.
157.	Otani H, Morita T, Uno S et al. Usefulness of the leaflet-based interven- tion for family members of terminally ill cancer patients with delirium. J Palliat Med 2013; 16: 419–422.
 
158.	Otani H, Morita T, Uno S et al. Effect of leaflet-based intervention on family members of terminally ill patients with cancer having delirium: historical control study. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2014; 31: 322–326.
159.	Kaneko M, Ryu S, Nishida H et al. Nurses’ recognition of the mental state of cancer patients and their own stress management—a study of Japanese cancer-care nurses. Psychooncology 2013; 22: 1624–1629.
160.	Sato K, Inoue Y, Umeda M et al. A Japanese region-wide survey of the knowledge, difficulties and self-reported palliative care practices among nurses. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2014; 44: 718–728.
161.	Kubota Y, Okuyama T, Uchida M et al. Effectiveness of a psycho-oncol- ogy training program for oncology nurses: a randomized controlled trial. Psychooncology 2016; 25: 712–718.
162.	LaFever S, Bory A, Nelson J. Delirium in patients with cancer: what nurses need to know to improve care. Clin J Oncol Nurs 2015; 19: 585–590.
163.	Sockalingam S, Tan A, Hawa R et al. Interprofessional education for de- lirium care: a systematic review. J Interprof Care 2014; 28: 345–351.
164.	Maltoni M, Scarpi E, Rosati M et al. Palliative sedation in end-of-life care and survival: a systematic review. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 1378–1383.
165.	Beller EM, van Driel ML, McGregor L et al. Palliative pharmacological sedation for terminally ill adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 1: CD010206.
166.	Sessler CN, Gosnell MS, Grap MJ et al. The Richmond Agitation- Sedation Scale: validity and reliability in adult intensive care unit patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166: 1338–1344.
167.	Bush SH, Grassau PA, Yarmo MN et al. The Richmond Agitation- Sedation Scale modified for palliative care inpatients (RASS-PAL): a pilot study exploring validity and feasibility in clinical practice. BMC Palliat Care 2014; 13: 17.
168.	Cherny NI. ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of refractory symptoms at the end of life and the use of palliative sedation. Ann Oncol 2014; 25(Suppl 3): iii143–iii152.
169.	Barr J, Fraser GL, Puntillo K et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of pain, agitation, and delirium in adult patients in the in- tensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2013; 41: 263–306.
170.	Inouye SK, Robinson T, Blaum C et al. Postoperative delirium in older adults: best practice statement from the American Geriatrics Society. J Am Coll Surg 2015; 220: 136–148.e1.
171.	World Health Organization. The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders: diagnostic criteria for research, 1993. http:// www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/GRNBOOK.pdf (17 April 2018, date last accessed).
172.	Kerr CW, Donnelly JP, Wright ST et al. Progression of delirium in advanced illness: a multivariate model of caregiver and clinician per- spectives. J Palliat Med 2013; 16: 768–773.
173.	Breitbart W, Alici Y. Evidence-based treatment of delirium in patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 1206–1214.
174.	Breitbart W, Lawlor P, Friedlander M. Delirium in the terminally ill. In HM Chochinov, W Breitbart (eds), Handbook of Psychiatry in Palliative Medicine, 2nd edition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press 2009; 81–100.
175.	Hshieh TT, Yue J, Oh E et al. Effectiveness of multicomponent non- pharmacological delirium interventions: a meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175: 512–520.
176.	Twycross R, Wilcock A, Howard P (eds). PCF5: Palliative Care Formulary, 5th edition. Nottingham: Palliativedrugs.com 2014.
177.	Procyshyn RM, Bezchlibnyk-Butler KZ, Jeffries JJ (eds). Clinical Handbook of Psychotropic Drugs, 21st edition. Boston: Hogrefe Publishing 2015.
178.	Bush SH, Tierney S, Lawlor PG. Clinical assessment and management of delirium in the palliative care setting. Drugs 2017; 77: 1623–1643.
179.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
