clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology 26 (Supplement 5): v116–v125, 2015

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL): ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up†
H. Tilly1, M. Gomes da Silva2, U. Vitolo3, A. Jack4, M. Meignan5, A. Lopez-Guillermo6, J. Walewski7,
M. André8, P. W. Johnson9, M. Pfreundschuh10 & M. Ladetto11, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Centre Henri-Becquerel, Université de Rouen, Rouen, France; 2Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal; 3A.O. Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy; 4St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, UK; 5Henri Mondor University Hospital, Créteil, France; 6Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; 7Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Institute and Oncology Centre, Warsaw, Poland; 8CHU Dinant-Godinne, UCL Namur, Yvoir, Belgium; 9Cancer Research UK, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK; 10Innere Medizin I, Universität des Saarlandes, Hamburg, Germany; 11Divisione di Ematologia, Azienda Ospedaliera Santi Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy


 
incidence and epidemiology
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) constitutes 30%–58% of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma series. The crude incidence in Europe is 3.8/100 000/year [1]. The incidence increases with age and varies considerably across Europe. A family history of lymphoma, auto- immune disease, human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infection, hepatitis C virus (HCV) seropositivity, a high body mass as a young adult and some occupational exposures have been identiﬁed as risk factors of DLBCL [2]. In recent years, there have been important survival improvements for DLBCL in all European regions [3].

diagnosis and pathology/molecular biology
The diagnosis of DLBCL should be carried out in a reference haematopathology laboratory with expertise in morphological interpretation and the facilities to carry out the full range of phenotypic and molecular investigations [V, A].
A surgical excision biopsy remains the optimal method of diag- nosis [V, A]. This allows assessment of nodal architecture and pro- vides adequate material for phenotypic and molecular studies. Ideally, the biopsy should be sent unﬁxed to the laboratory to allow ﬂow cytometric studies to be carried out and high-quality DNA and RNA to be extracted. Needle-core and endoscopic biopsies should be reserved for patients for whom a surgical approach is impractical or would entail excessive risk [IV, B]. A ﬁne-needle aspirate should not be used as the sole basis for a diagnosis of DLBCL [V, E].
A morphological diagnosis of DLBCL should be conﬁrmed in all cases by immunophenotypic investigations, either

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via L. Taddei 4, CH-6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland.
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org

†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: February 2002, last update August 2015.
This publication supersedes the previously published version—Ann Oncol 2012; 23 (Suppl. 7): vii78–vii82.
 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) or ﬂow cytometry or a combin- ation of both techniques [V, A]. Panels used must be designed to conﬁrm B-cell lineage, and must be comprehensive enough to highlight possible variant forms such as immunoblastic lymph- oma [4], primary mediastinal B cell lymphoma (PMBCL), T-cell/ histiocyte rich large B-cell lymphoma, primary cutaneous DLBCL leg-type or EBV-positive DLBCL of the elderly. They must also distinguish alternative diagnoses that may be difﬁcult to make on the basis of morphology alone, and which have im- portant clinical consequences as plasmablastic lymphoma or soft tissue involvement by myeloma, Burkitt lymphoma, unclas- siﬁable B-cell lymphoma with features intermediate between diffuse large cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma, blastic mantle cell lymphoma and some cases of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. A suggested immunohistochemical panel would include CD20, CD79a, BCL6, CD10, MYC, BCL2, Ki67, IRF4, CyclinD1, CD5
and CD23. EBER-1 staining may be used to identify the Epstein–Barr virus-positive DLBCL subtype of the elderly popu- lation. The histological report should give the diagnosis accord- ing to the current World Health Organization classiﬁcation [5].
Where the level of conﬁdence in the diagnosis is reduced, for example, because only a small biopsy specimen is available or where the putatively neoplastic population has a normal pheno- type by IHC, demonstration of B-cell monoclonality by a poly- merase chain reaction-based method should be  considered [IV, C] [6].
The cell of origin phenotype determined by gene expression proﬁling is also a major prognostic factor in DLBCL [7–9]. Tumours with a germinal centre phenotype have a signiﬁcantly better clinical outcome that those with an activated B-cell pheno- type. The nature of type 3 or unclassiﬁed subgroups requires further clariﬁcation. Newer methods, based on evaluation of a limited set of genes, have been validated in comparison with standard gene expression, and are now used in the setting of clin- ical trials [9, 10]. Cell of origin can also be determined by IHC but published data on the prognostic effect of immunohistochem- ical techniques are contradictory, and it is not recommended to routinely base clinical decisions on these results [11, 12]. General
 

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
issues of reproducibility may also limit the value of IHC as a prog- nostic biomarker [13].
The presence of an MYC rearrangement in combination with BCL2 rearrangement, and possibly other genetic abnor- malities, has been described as a special entity (‘double-hit’ or ‘triple-hit’ lymphoma). However, the prognostic signiﬁcance of these rearrangements remains controversial and optimal clinical management is not established [14–16]. This assess- ment is recommended, wherever technically possible, in newly diagnosed and relapsed patients being treated with curative intent, using interphase ﬂuorescence in situ hybridisation [IV, B]. The immunohistochemical expression of MYC and/or BCL2 or both (double expressors) is only partly correlated with genetic abnormalities, but the concurrent expression of MYC and BCL2 is usually associated with a poor outcome [17–19].


staging and risk assessment
Physical examination, performance status (PS) and assessment of B symptoms are necessary [V, A]. A complete blood count, routine blood chemistry including lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and uric acid, as well as screening tests for HIV, hepa- titis B virus (HBV) (HBs antigen, anti-HBs and anti-HBc anti- bodies) and HCV are required [V, A]. Protein electrophoresis is recommended [IV, B].
Based on recent consensus recommendations for staging and restaging of lymphoma developed by the clinical and imaging working groups of the international conference of malignant lymphomas (Lugano classiﬁcation), ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/computed tomography (CT) scan is now recommended as the gold standard for staging DLBCL patients [V, A] [20, 21]. PET/CT is more accurate than contrast-enhanced CT (CeCT), with increased sensitivity for nodal and extranodal sites; in practice, CeCT is often carried out before PET/CT. Should this not be the case, a full diagnostic high-dose CeCT should be carried out when necessary, in com- bination with PET/CT and after the PET scan [V, B]. Indeed, CeCT may be necessary for a better delineation of lymphadenop- athy from the bowel; the detection of compression/thrombosis of central/mediastinal vessels, radiation planning or a more accurate measurement of nodal sites in the context of a trial. The ﬁndings of CeCT when carried out at baseline determine whether the low- dose non-enhanced CT part of the PET/CT scan will be sufﬁcient for restaging.
Focal bone marrow FDG uptake with or without increased diffuse uptake is more sensitive than bone marrow biopsy (BMB) for inﬁltration in DLBCL and is highly speciﬁc [22]. Low-volume involvement (<10%–20%) and discordant lymphoma may be missed by PET/CT imaging but these positive BMB/negative PET/CT ﬁndings are <10% [23]. Thus, biopsy is no longer required when a PET/CT scan demonstrates bone or marrow in- volvement indicating advanced-stage disease but is appropriate in case of negative PET, when its results would change prognosis and treatment, especially when a shortened number of immuno- chemotherapy cycles is proposed [V, C].
For suspected central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma, mag- netic resonance imaging is the modality of choice [III, A].
 
A diagnostic lumbar puncture should be considered in high- risk patients as described above [V, A]. Flow cytometry, when available, enhances the detection of lymphoma cells in the cere- brospinal ﬂuid [24].
Cardiac function (left ventricular ejection fraction) should be assessed before treatment [V, A]. The risks of infertility and pos- sibilities of fertility preservation should be discussed, depending on the type of treatment being proposed.
The staging is established according to the Ann Arbor classiﬁ-
cation system [I, A] (Table 1). A new staging system that has not been prospectively validated has been recently proposed [20]. For prognostic purposes, the International Prognostic Index (IPI) and age-adjusted IPI (aaIPI) should be calculated [I, A]
[25] (Table 2). Other factors that may affect prognosis and treat- ment strategies, including the maximum bulk of the disease, should be assessed [30].






















	Stage III–IV
Performance status 2–4	
Risk categories	Low	0	98 (96–100)
	Low intermediate	1	92 (87–95)
High intermediate High	2
3	}75 (66–82)
 

 















































 

treatment
Treatment strategies should be stratiﬁed  according  to  age, IPI and feasibility of dose-intensiﬁed approaches (Table 3). Whenever available, the inclusion in a clinical trial is recommended.
In cases with high tumour load, precautions such as the ad- ministration of prednisone ( p.o.) several days as ‘prephase’ treatment are advised to avoid tumour lysis syndrome [I, A]. Dose reductions due to haematological toxicity should be avoided [I, A]. Febrile neutropaenia justiﬁes prophylactic use of
 

haematopoietic growth factors in patients treated with curative intent and in patients older than 60 years of age [I, A].
young low-risk patients (aa-IPI = 0) without bulky disease
Six cycles of combination chemotherapy with cyclophospha- mide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone (CHOP) treat- ment combined with six doses of rituximab given every 21 days is the current standard [I, A] [31]. Consolidation by radiother- apy to initial non-bulky sites has no proven beneﬁt in patients treated with rituximab or not [I, A] [32, 33].
 
young low-intermediate-risk patients (aa-IPI = 1) or IPI low risk (aa-IPI = 0) with bulky disease
Rituximab (R)-CHOP 21 × 6 with radiotherapy to the sites of previous bulky disease was shown to be effective in this group of patients, based on the results of the MINT study [II, B] [31]. Alternatively, an intensiﬁcation of chemotherapy with R-ACVBP (rituximab, doxorubicin, vindesine, cyclophosphamide, bleo- mycin and prednisolone), given every 2 weeks followed by sequential consolidation, has been shown to improve survival compared with eight cycles of R-CHOP in this category, but radiotherapy was omitted in both arms of this trial [I, A] [26]. In this group of patients, either R-CHOP21 × 6 with radiother- apy to the sites of previous bulky disease or the intensiﬁed regimen R-ACVBP is recommended [II, B].

young high- and high-intermediate-risk patients (aa-IPI ≥ 2)
There is no current standard in this subgroup, and in this group especially, enrolment in clinical trials should be a priority. Six to eight cycles of chemotherapy with CHOP combined with eight doses of rituximab given every 21 days are most frequently applied [III, B]. Dose dense treatment with R-CHOP given every 14 days has not demonstrated a survival advantage over standard R-CHOP given every 21 days [I, C] [34]. In this trial, R-CHOP 14 failed to show a better outcome in any DLBCL subset, including young poor-risk patients, although the trial was not powered to compare multiple clinical subgroups. Intensive treatment with R-ACVBP or R-CHOEP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxo- rubicin, vincristine, etoposide and prednisolone) is frequently used but these regimens have not been directly compared with R-CHOP in this category [II, B] [27, 35].
Four randomised trials comparing rituximab chemotherapy
(R-chemotherapy) followed by high-dose chemotherapy (HDC) and autologous stem-cell transplantation (ASCT) versus R-chemotherapy alone have been presented. Two trials showed a progression-free survival (PFS) beneﬁt for HDC with ASCT but no impact, at present, on overall survival (OS) [36, 37], while two trials failed to demonstrate an improve- ment for the HDC arm [35, 38]. Therefore, HDC with ASCT in ﬁrst line remains experimental or may be proposed for selected high-risk patients [II, C]. The role of consolidation by radiotherapy to initial sites of bulky disease is unknown. The role of interim PET to select patients who could beneﬁt from consolidative ASCT [39] or from radiotherapy [40] is under evaluation [I, C].

patients aged 60–80 years
Six to eight cycles of combination chemotherapy with CHOP plus eight doses of rituximab given every 21 days is the current standard [I, A] [41]. R-CHOP given every 14 days did not dem- onstrate a survival advantage over R-CHOP 21 [I, C] [34, 42]. If R-CHOP is given every 14 days, six cycles of CHOP with eight cycles of rituximab are sufﬁcient [I, A] [43]. In patients with localised disease (IPI = 0), no beneﬁt of consolidation by radio- therapy was shown in patients treated before the introduction of rituximab [I, A] [44], but a recent study indicated that irradi- ation could improve the outcome of elderly patients with bulky disease [II, C] [45]. In a phase II study, extended rituximab
 
exposure has been shown to improve outcome of elderly poor- prognosis patients without increasing toxicity [III, C] [46]. A comprehensive geriatric assessment in order to ascertain co- morbidities and functional decline is recommended to guide the choice of treatment in these patients [III, A] [47, 48]. R-CHOP treatment can usually be used up to 80 years of age in ﬁt patients [I, A] but modulation of treatment according to geriatric assess- ment is recommended [III, C] [49].

patients aged >80 years
The combination of rituximab with attenuated chemotherapy, such as R-miniCHOP, can induce complete remission and long survival in ﬁt patients older than 80 years [III, B] [50]. Substitution of doxorubicin by gemcitabine, etoposide or liposo- mal doxorubicin, or even its omission, can be considered from the beginning or after a few cycles in patients with cardiac dys- function or who are frail or unﬁt [III, C] [51].

central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis
Patients with high-intermediate and high-risk IPI, especially those with more than one extranodal site or elevated LDH, are at higher risk of CNS relapse [52]. Testicular, renal and adrenal involvements have been validated as additional risk factors [53]. CNS prophylaxis should be recommended in these populations [II, A]. MYC gene rearrangement is associated with a high risk of CNS relapse [43]. Although widely used, intrathecal injections of methotrexate may not be an optimal method. Intravenous high- dose methotrexate has been shown to be associated with efﬁcient disease control [IV, C] [54–56]. Prospective trials are ongoing to evaluate this alternative approach.

some DLBCLs require special consideration
•	Extranodal DLBCLs and PMBCLs are considered in other guidelines.
•	Patients with HIV infection should usually receive the same
treatment as HIV-negative patients in association with anti- viral therapy [II, A] [57].
•	Patients previously exposed to HBV (HBs antigen-negative,
anti-HBc-positive) are at risk of reactivation during treatment with R-CHOP. Antiviral prophylaxis or periodic HBV DNA monitoring and antiviral treatment in the case of reactivation are recommended [III, A] [58].

response evaluation
post-treatment evaluation
FDG-PET/CT is now the recommended standard for post-treat- ment assessment in DLBCL [I, A] [59]. The recent Lugano classiﬁ- cation based on the visual Deauville criteria (5-point scale, Table 4)

 
has proposed different response categories, termed ‘metabolic response categories’ [20, 21]:
•	Complete metabolic response (CMR) is deﬁned when no residual uptake exists or if the residual uptake is lower to or equal to the liver activity (Deauville score 1–3), with or without evidence of residual mass on the CT part of the exam- ination, and without FDG-avid lesions in the bone marrow. Since most patients with score 3 (uptake greater than medias- tinal activity) have a good prognosis with standard treatment, score 3 has been included in the CMR category but a careful evaluation of these patients is recommended.
•	Deauville scores 4 and 5 indicate residual disease in most
cases. Three categories of response are deﬁned by comparing the residual uptake with the tumour uptake in baseline scan: partial metabolic response when the uptake has decreased, no metabolic response when it has not changed or progressive metabolic disease (PMD) when it has increased. A new site of FDG uptake consistent with lymphoma is graded score 5 and indicates a PMD but should be biopsied or followed by inter- val scans in case of aetiological uncertainties. In the presence of residual metabolically active tissue, where salvage treatment is being considered, a biopsy is recommended [III, A].

interim evaluation
Mid-treatment imaging after three to four cycles may be used to rule out progression in clinical practice [V, B]. It is usually carried out with CT but PET/CT can also be used when available [20]. Changing treatment solely on the basis of interim PET/CT is dis- couraged [II, E], unless there is clear evidence of progression.
Early PET evaluation carried out after one to two cycles of treatment has been shown to be predictive of outcome, but should be reserved for clinical trials at the present time [II, D].

follow-up
Patients with DLBCL who are event-free at 2 years have an iden- tical OS to that of the general population, emphasising the need to only speciﬁcally monitor the disease in this early period [60].
Careful history and physical examination every 3 months for 1 year, every 6 months for 2 more years and then once a year with attention to development of secondary tumours or other long-term side-effects of chemotherapy is recommended [V, D]. Blood count should be carried out at 3, 6, 12 and 24 months, then only as needed for evaluation of suspicious symptoms or clinical ﬁndings in those patients suitable for further therapy [V, C]. Minimal radiological examinations at 6, 12 and 24 months after end of treatment by CT scan are common practice, but there is no deﬁnitive evidence that routine imaging in patients in complete remission provides any outcome advantage, and it may increase the incidence of secondary malignancies [V, D] [61, 62]. Routine surveillance with PET scan is not recommended [V, E].
High-risk patients with curative options may potentially mandate more frequent evaluation.

relapsed and refractory DLBCL
incidence. Overall, more than 30% of DLBCL will ultimately relapse. The incidence in the European Union is therefore estimated
 
to be around 1/100 000/year. In addition to initial prognostic factors, the nature of previous treatments and time from initial treatment are of utmost importance [63].

diagnosis. In patients who are suspected of having relapsed on the basis of imaging studies, the diagnosis should be conﬁrmed by biopsy before proceeding to second-line therapy. In these circumstances, a needle-core biopsy is acceptable as primary investigation.

staging and risk assessment. Patients still amenable to curative therapy should have the same examinations as at ﬁrst diagnosis.

treatment. The following recommendations apply to patients who received adequate rituximab and anthracycline-containing ﬁrst-line therapy.
In patients aged <65–70 years with good PS and no major organ dysfunction, salvage regimens with rituximab and chemo- therapy followed, in responsive patients, by HDC and ASCT, are recommended [II, A] [63–65] Salvage regimens such as R-DHAP (rituximab, cisplatin, cytarabine, dexamethasone) or R-ICE (rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide) appear to have similar outcomes [I, A] [63]. However, R-GDP (rituximab, cisplatin, gemcitabine, dexamethasone) has been shown to have similar efﬁcacy but less toxicity than R-DHAP [I, A] [66]. One study suggested a possible advantage of R-DHAP in the germi- nal centre B-cell subtype, but this needs conﬁrmation [IV, C] [67]. BEAM (carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine and melphalan) is the most commonly used high-dose regimen [III, B]. Additional involved-ﬁeld radiation or iceberg radiation may be used, especially in the few cases with limited stage disease, but this has never been evaluated in controlled trials [IV, C]. Maintenance with rituximab is not recommended [I, E] [68]. Allogeneic transplantation with a sibling or matched unrelated donor may be considered in patients with refractory disease, early relapse or relapse after ASCT [III, B] [69].
Patients not suitable for high-dose therapy may be treated with the same or other salvage regimens as R-GEMOX (rituximab, gemcitabine, oxaliplatin) [III, B] [70]. Pixantrone, a new anthra- cycline-like drug with reduced cardiotoxicity, demonstrated some efﬁcacy in heavily treated patients [II, C] [71]. However, these patients should be preferably enrolled in clinical trials testing the activity of other novel drugs.

response evaluation. Response criteria are identical to those of ﬁrst-line treatment evaluation. An evaluation should be carried out after three to four cycles of the salvage regimen (before high-dose treatment) and after the end of all therapy. Results of PET before high-dose treatment are correlated to clinical outcome [72].

follow-up. Follow-up of patients in second response is the same as for ﬁrst response.

personalised medicine
Progress in the knowledge of pathological and molecular hetero- geneity of DLBCL has led to the study of new agents that have distinct activity in molecular subtypes, or have speciﬁc efﬁcacy on molecular targets involved in disease pathogenesis. At the
 

 

Diagnosis and pathology/molecular biology
•	Diagnosis should be carried out in a reference haematopathology laboratory with expertise in morphological interpretation and the facilities to carry out the full range of phenotypic and molecular investigations [V, A].
•	Surgical biopsy is the optimal method of diagnosis. [V, A].
•	Needle-core and endoscopic biopsies should be reserved for patients for whom a surgical approach is impractical or would entail excessive risk [IV, B].
•	A fine-needle aspirate should not be used as the sole basis for a diagnosis of DLBCL [V, E].
•	A morphological diagnosis of DLBCL should be confirmed in all cases by immunophenotypic investigations [V, A].
•	If there is doubt in the diagnosis, demonstration of B-cell monoclonality by a PCR-based method should be considered [IV, C].
•	Assessment of MYC and BCL2 rearrangement is recommended (whenever technically possible) in newly diagnosed and relapsed patients treated with curative intent, using interphase FISH [IV, B].
Staging and risk assessment
•	Physical exam, performance status and assessment of B symptoms are necessary [V, A].
•	A complete blood count, routine blood chemistry including LDH and uric acid, as well as screening tests for HIV, HBV and HCV are required [V, A].
•	Protein electrophoresis is recommended [IV, B].
•	FDG-PET/CT scan is recommended as the gold standard for staging DLBCL patients [V, A].
•	If CeCT is not carried out before PET/CT, a full diagnostic high-dose CeCT should be carried out when necessary, in combination with PET/CT [V, B]. Biopsy may be avoided when PET/CT scans demonstrate bone or marrow involvement indicating advanced-stage disease but is appropriate in the case of negative PET, when its results would change prognosis and treatment, especially when a shortened number of immunochemotherapy cycles is proposed [V, C].
•	For suspected CNS lymphoma, MRI is the modality of choice [III, A].
•	A diagnostic lumbar puncture should be considered in high-risk patients [V, A].
•	Cardiac function (LVEF) should be assessed before treatment [V, A].
•	The staging is established according to the Ann Arbor classification system [I, A].
•	For prognostic purposes, the IPI and aa-IPI should be calculated [I, A]. Treatment
•	Treatment strategies should be stratified according to age, IPI and feasibility of dose-intensified approaches.
•	Whenever available, inclusion in a clinical trial is recommended.
•	In cases with high tumour load, precautions are advised to avoid tumour lysis syndrome [I, A].
•	Dose reductions due to haematological toxicity should be avoided whenever possible [I, A].
•	The risk of febrile neutropenia justifies prophylactic use of haematopoietic growth factors in patients treatment with curative intent and in patients >60 years of age [I, A].
•	For young, low-risk patients (aa-IPI = 0) without bulky disease:
○	six cycles of combination chemotherapy with CHOP treatment combined with six doses of rituximab given every 21 days is the current standard [I, A];
○	consolidation by radiotherapy to initial non-bulky sites has no proven benefit in patients treated with rituximab or not [I, A].
•	For young low-intermediate-risk patients (aa-IPI = 1) or IPI low risk (aa-IPI = 0) with bulky disease:
○	either R-CHOP21 × 6 with radiotherapy to the sites of previous bulky disease or the intensified regimen R-ACVBP is recommended [II, B].
•	For young high- and high-intermediate-risk patients (aa-IPI ≥ 2):
○	enrolment in clinical trials should be a priority;
○	six to eight cycles of chemotherapy with CHOP combined with eight doses of rituximab given every 21 days are most frequently applied [III, B];
○	dose dense treatment with R-CHOP given every 14 days has not demonstrated a survival advantage over standard R-CHOP given every 21 days [I, C];
○	intensive treatment with R-ACVBP or R-CHOEP is frequently used but these regimens have not been directly compared with R-CHOP in this category
[II, B];
○	HDC with ASCT in first line remains experimental or may be proposed for selected high-risk patients [II, C];
○	the role of interim PET to select patients who could benefit from consolidative ASCT or from radiotherapy is under evaluation [I, C].
•	For patients aged 60–80 years:
○	six to eight cycles of combination chemotherapy with CHOP plus eight doses of rituximab given every 21 days is the current standard [I, A];
○	if R-CHOP is given every 14 days, six cycles of CHOP with eight cycles of rituximab are sufficient [I, A];
○	a comprehensive geriatric assessment in order to ascertain comorbidities and functional decline is recommended to guide the choice of treatment in
elderly poor-prognosis patients [III, A];
○	R-CHOP treatment can usually be used up to 80 years of age in fit patients [I, A], but modulation of treatment according to geriatric assessment is
recommended [III, C].
•	For patients aged >80 years:
○	the combination of rituximab with attenuated chemotherapy, such as R-miniCHOP, can induce complete remission and long survival in fit patients
older than 80 years [III, B];
○	substitution of doxorubicin by gemcitabine, etoposide or liposomal doxorubicin, or even its omission, can be considered from the beginning or after a
few cycles in patients with cardiac dysfunction or who are frail or unfit [III, C].

Continued

 
Table 5. Continued


•	CNS prophylaxis:
○	should be recommended for patients with high-intermediate-risk and high-risk IPI, especially those with more than one extranodal site or elevated
LDH or for patients with testicular, renal or adrenal involvement [II, A];
○	intravenous high-dose methotrexate has been shown to be associated with efficient disease control [IV, C].
•	Patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection should usually receive the same treatment as HIV-negative patients in association with antiviral therapy [II, A].
•	Antiviral prophylaxis or periodic HBV DNA monitoring and antiviral treatment are recommended for patients previously exposed to HBV who
experience reactivation of the virus during treatment [III, A]. Response evaluation
•	FDG-PET/CT is the recommended standard for post-treatment assessment in DLBCL [I, A].
•	In the presence of residual metabolically active tissue, where salvage treatment is being considered, a biopsy is recommended [III, A].
•	Interim evaluation:
○	mid-treatment imaging after three to four cycles may be used to rule out progression in clinical practice [V, B];
○	changing treatment solely on the basis of interim PET/CT is discouraged [II, E], unless there is clear evidence of progression;
○	early PET evaluation carried out after one to two cycles of treatment has been shown to be predictive of outcome, but should be reserved for clinical
trials at the present time [II, D].

Follow-up
•	Careful history and physical examination every 3 months for 1 year, every 6 months for 2 further years and then once a year with attention to development of secondary tumours or other long-term side-effects of chemotherapy is recommended [V, D].
•	Blood count should be carried out at 3, 6, 12 and 24 months, then only as needed for evaluation of suspicious symptoms or clinical findings in those
patients suitable for further therapy [V, C].
•	Minimal radiological examinations at 6, 12 and 24 months after end of treatment, by CT scan, is common practice, but there is no definitive evidence that routine imaging in patients in complete remission provides any outcome advantage and it may increase the incidence of secondary malignancies [V, D]. Routine surveillance with PET scan is not recommended [V, E].


DLBCL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridisation; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose; PET, positron emission tomography; CT, computed tomography; CeCT, contrast-enhanced CT; CNS, central nervous system; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; IPI, International Prognostic Index; aa-IPI, age-adjusted IPI; CHOP, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone; R, rituximab; R- AVCBP, rituximab, doxorubicin, vindesine, cyclophosphamide, bleomycin and prednisolone; R-CHOEP, rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, etoposide and prednisolone; HDC, high-dose chemotherapy; ASCT, autologous stem-cell transplantation.


 
present time, pending results of large comparative studies, none of these agents is appropriate for routine therapy in practice.
The activated B-cell (ABC) subtype has been shown to have a worse prognosis when compared with germinal centre B-cell (GCB) in patients treated by R-CHOP [8]. A subgroup analysis suggested that R-ACVBP could have a survival beneﬁt over R- CHOP in the non-GCB population [III, C] [73]. The ABC subtype is characterised by a constitutive activation of the NF-κB pathway, which could be targeted by different agents as bortezomib and lenalidomide. Bortezomib combined with dose-adjusted-EPOCH (etoposide, vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide and prednisone) (DA-EPOCH) has shown selective activity in a small study of relapsed/refractory ABC- DLBCL [74]. A UK/Swiss phase III trial (REMoDL-B) compar- ing R-CHOP with R-CHOP-bortezomib in gene expression prolife deﬁned cell of origin subgroups of DLBCL is nearly com- pleted. Lenalidomide, as a single agent, demonstrated selective efﬁcacy in the non-GCB subtype [75, 76]. In two phase II studies, the combination of lenalidomide and R-CHOP showed acceptable toxicity [77, 78]. In one of these studies, the PFS and OS of the patients treated with the combination were identical in non-GCB and GCB subtypes [78], leading to the initiation of a randomised study in the ABC subtype.
Ibrutinib, a novel oral Bruton’s tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has shown selective activity in ABC-DLBCL. The combination of ibrutinib with R-CHOP has demonstrated promising responses, leading to the initiation of a phase III trial in the non-GCB population [79].
DLBCL with MYC rearrangement and/or MYC overexpres- sion is usually considered a subgroup with aggressive behaviour. However, many uncertainties remain about the extent of this subgroup concerning translocation partners, additional defects (double or triple hit), combination of genetic abnormalities and MYC protein overexpression and dual overexpression with MYC and BCL2 [80]. Although R-CHOP gives poor outcomes for double-hit lymphomas, only preliminary results have sug- gested better results with more intensive regimens, and clinical trials are required in this subtype [81, 82].
Whole-genome next-generation sequencing studies have identiﬁed frequent and recurrent mutations which may play a crucial role in lymphoma development [83–85]. These molecu- lar defects may prove useful targets in the future treatment and management of DLBCL.



methodology
These clinical practice guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for clinical prac- tice guidelines development. The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of recommendations is shown in Table 5. Levels of evidence and grades of recom- mendation have been applied using the system  shown  in Table 6. Statements without grading were considered justiﬁed standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.
 
conﬂict of interest
HT has received honoraria from Celgene, Roche, Janssen-Cilag and Takeda; research contracts from Celgene, Roche/Genentech and Janssen-Cilag. MG has reported advisory boards for Roche, Celgene, Janssen-Cilag, Pﬁzer and Ferrer. UV has reported ad- visory boards for Roche; lectures sponsored by Roche, Janssen, Celgene and Mundipharma. AL-G has reported advisory boards for Roche, Celgene, Novartis, Mundipharma, Inﬁnity, Bayer and Gilead. JW has declared advisory boards for Roche, Celgene, Janssen-Cilag and Takeda; research support from Roche, Celgene, Janssen-Cilag, Takeda, GlaxoSmithKline, Gilead and Seattle Genetics. PJ has reported research grants partially funded by Janssen-Cilag and Epizyme; member of data moni- toring and safety committee for Boehringer Ingelheim; advisory board member for Roche, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Janssen-Cilag and Takeda. MP has declared advisory boards for Boehringer- Ingelheim, Celgene and Roche; research support from Roche, Amgen and Spectrum. ML has reported honoraria from Celgene, Janssen-Cilag, Roche, Amgen Mundipharma and Teva; research contracts from Celgene, Pﬁzer, Mundipharma and Roche; funds received from Amgen, Roche and Takeda. MM and MA have reported no potential conﬂicts of interest. UV has not reported any potential conﬂicts of interest.


references
1.	Sant M, Allemani C, Tereanu C et al. Incidence of hematologic malignancies in Europe by morphologic subtype: results of the HAEMACARE project. Blood 2010; 116: 3724–3734.
2.	Morton LM, Slager SL, Cerhan JR et al. Etiologic heterogeneity among non- Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes: the InterLymph Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Subtypes Project. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 2014: 130–144.
3.	Sant M, Minicozzi P, Mounier M et al. Survival for haematological malignancies in Europe between 1997 and 2008 by region and age: results of EUROCARE-5, a population-based study. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 931–942.
4.	Ott G, Ziepert M, Klapper W et al. Immunoblastic morphology but not the immunohistochemical GCB/non-GCB classiﬁer predicts outcome in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in the RICOVER-60 trial of the DSHNHL. Blood 2010; 116: 4916–4925.
5.	Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL et al. World Health Organization Classiﬁcation of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, 4th edition. Lyon, France: IARC 2008.
6.	Langerak AW, Groenen PJ, Brüggemann M et al. EuroClonality/BIOMED-2 guidelines for interpretation and reporting of Ig/TCR clonality testing in suspected lymphoproliferations. Leukemia 2012; 26: 2159–2171.
7.	Wright G, Tan B, Rosenwald A et al. A gene expression-based method to diagnose clinically distinct subgroups of diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100: 9991–9996.
8.	Lenz G, Wright GW, Emre NC et al. Molecular subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma arise by distinct genetic pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 105: 13520–13525.
9.	Scott DW, Wright GW, Williams PM et al. Determining cell-of-origin subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma using gene expression in formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn- embedded tissue. Blood 2014; 123: 1214–1217.
10.	Mareschal S, Ruminy P, Bagacean C et al. Accurate classiﬁcation of germinal center b-cell-like/activated b-cell-like diffuse large b-cell lymphoma using a simple and rapid reverse transcriptase-multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation assay: a CALYM study. Mol Diagn 2015 [Epub ahead of print].
11.	Hans CP, Weisenburger DD, Greiner TC et al. Conﬁrmation of the molecular classiﬁcation of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma by immunohistochemistry using a tissue microarray. Blood 2004; 103: 275–282.
 

12.	Choi WW, Weisenburger DD, Greiner TC et al. A new immunostain algorithm classiﬁes diffuse large B-cell lymphoma into molecular subtypes with high accuracy. Clin Cancer Res 2009; 15: 5494–5502.
13.	de Jong D, Rosenwald A, Chhanabhai M et al. Immunohistochemical prognostic markers in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: validation of tissue microarray as a prerequisite for broad clinical applications—a study from the Lunenburg Lymphoma Biomarker Consortium. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 805–812.
14.	Savage KJ, Johnson NA, Ben-Neriah S et al. MYC gene rearrangements are associated with a poor prognosis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients treated with R-CHOP chemotherapy. Blood 2009; 114: 3533–3537.
15.	Barrans S, Crouch S, Smith A et al. Rearrangement of MYC is associated with poor prognosis in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated in the era of rituximab. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 3360–3365.
16.	Lin P, Dickason TJ, Fayad LE et al. Prognostic value of MYC rearrangement in cases of B-cell lymphoma, unclassiﬁable, with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma. Cancer 2012; 118: 1566–1573.
17.	Green TM, Young KH, Visco C et al. Immunohistochemical double-hit score is a strong predictor of outcome in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 3460–3467.
18.	Johnson NA, Slack GW, Savage KJ et al. Concurrent expression of MYC and BCL2 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 3452–3459.
19.	Horn H, Ziepert M, Becher C et al. MYC status in concert with BCL2 and BCL6 expression predicts outcome in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Blood 2013; 121: 2253–2263.
20.	Cheson BD, Fisher RI, Barrington SF et al. Recommendations for initial evaluation, staging, and response assessment of Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma: the Lugano classiﬁcation. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 3059–3068.
21.	Barrington SF, Mikhaeel NG, Kostakoglu L et al. Role of imaging in the staging and response assessment of lymphoma: consensus of the International Conference on Malignant Lymphomas Imaging Working Group. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 3048–3058.
22.	Khan AB, Barrington SF, Mikhaeel NG et al. PET-CT staging of DLBCL accurately identiﬁes and provides new insight into the clinical signiﬁcance of bone marrow involvement. Blood 2013; 122: 61–67.
23.	Pelosi E, Penna D, Douroukas A et al. Bone marrow disease detection with FDG- PET/CT and bone marrow biopsy during the staging of malignant lymphoma: results from a large multicentre study. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2011; 55: 469–475.
24.	Benevolo G, Stacchini A, Spina M et al. Final results of a multicenter trial addressing role of CSF ﬂow cytometric analysis in NHL patients at high risk for CNS dissemination. Blood 2012; 120: 3222–3228.
25.	A predictive model for aggressive non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The International Non- Hodgkin’s Lymphoma Prognostic Factors Project. N Engl J Med 1993; 329: 987–994.
26.	Récher C, Coifﬁer B, Haioun C et al. Intensiﬁed chemotherapy with ACVBP plus rituximab versus standard CHOP plus rituximab for the treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (LNH03-2B): an open-label randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet 2011; 378: 1858–1867.
27.	Fitoussi O, Belhadj K, Mounier N et al. Survival impact of rituximab combined with ACVBP and upfront consolidation autotransplantation in high-risk diffuse large B- cell lymphoma for GELA. Haematologica 2011; 96: 1136–1143.
28.	Ziepert M, Hasenclever D, Kuhnt E et al. Standard international prognostic index remains a valid predictor of outcome for patients with aggressive CD20+ B-cell lymphoma in the rituximab era. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 2373–2380.
29.	Ketterer N, Coifﬁer B, Thieblemont C et al. Phase III study of ACVBP versus ACVBP plus rituximab for patients with localized low-risk diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (LNH03–1B). Ann Oncol 2013; 24: 1032–1037.
30.	Pfreundschuh M, Ho AD, Cavallin-Stahl E et al. Prognostic signiﬁcance of maximum tumour (bulk) diameter in young patients with good-prognosis diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma treated with CHOP-like chemotherapy with or without rituximab: an exploratory analysis of the MabThera International Trial Group (MInT) study. Lancet Oncol 2008; 9: 435–444.
31.	Pfreundschuh M, Kuhnt E, Trumper L et al. CHOP-like chemotherapy with or without rituximab in young patients with good-prognosis diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma: 6-year results of an open-label randomised study of the MabThera International Trial (MInT) Group. Lancet Oncol 2011; 12: 1013–1022.
 

32.	Reyes F, Lepage E, Ganem G et al. ACVBP versus CHOP plus radiotherapy for localized aggressive lymphoma. N Engl J Med 2005; 352: 1197–1205.
33.	Lamy T, Damaj G, Gyan E et al. R-CHOP with or without radiotherapy in non-bulky limited-stage diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL): preliminary results of the prospective randomized phase III 02-03 trial from the Lysa/Goelams Group. In: 2014 ASH Annual Meeting, Orlando, Florida. Abstract 393.
34.	Cunningham D, Hawkes EA, Jack A et al. Rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone in patients with newly diagnosed diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a phase 3 comparison of dose intensiﬁcation with 14-day versus 21-day cycles. Lancet 2013; 381: 1817–1826.
35.	Schmitz N, Nickelsen M, Ziepert M et al. Conventional chemotherapy (CHOEP-14) with rituximab or high-dose chemotherapy (MegaCHOEP) with rituximab for young, high-risk patients with aggressive B-cell lymphoma: an open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial (DSHNHL 2002–1). Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: 1250–1259.
36.	Vitolo U, Chiappella A, Brusamolino E et al. Rituximab dose-dense chemotherapy followed by intensiﬁed high-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation (HDC+ASCT) signiﬁcantly reduces the risk of progression compared to standard rituximab dose-dense chemotherapy as ﬁrst line treatment in young patients with high-risk (aa-IPI 2-3) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL): ﬁnal results of phase III randomized trial DLCL04 of the Fondazione Italiana Linfomi (FIL). Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts), 2012; 120: 688.
37.	Stiff PJ, Unger JM, Cook JR et al. Autologous transplantation as consolidation for aggressive non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. N Engl J Med 2013; 369: 1681–1690.
38.	Le Gouill S, Milpied NJ, Lamy T et al. First-line rituximab (R) high-dose therapy (R- HDT) versus R-CHOP14 for young adults with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: preliminary results of the GOELAMS 075 prospective multicenter randomized trial. J Clin Oncol (ASCO Annual Meeting Abstracts Part 1) 2011; 29: 8003.
39.	Casasnovas RO, Ysebaert L, Thieblemont C et al. Final results of a randomized phase II GELA/LYSA study of rituximab plus ACVBP or CHOP, using a PET-driven consolidation strategy, in patients with high-risk diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). J Clin Oncol (ASCO Annual Meeting Abstracts) 2014; 32: 8503.
40.	Sehn LH, Hardy ELG, Gill KK et al. Phase 2 trial of interim PET scan-tailored therapy in patients with advanced stage diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in British Columbia (BC). Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts) 2014; 124: 392.
41.	Coifﬁer B, Thieblemont C, Van Den Neste E et al. Long-term outcome of patients in the LNH-98.5 trial, the ﬁrst randomized study comparing rituximab-CHOP to standard CHOP chemotherapy in DLBCL patients: a study by the Groupe d’Etudes des Lymphomes de l’Adulte. Blood 2010; 116: 2040–2045.
42.	Delarue R, Tilly H, Mounier N et al. Dose-dense rituximab-CHOP compared with standard rituximab-CHOP in elderly patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (the LNH03-6B study): a randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2013; 14: 525–533.
43.	Pfreundschuh M, Schubert J, Ziepert M et al. Six versus eight cycles of bi-weekly CHOP-14 with or without rituximab in elderly patients with aggressive CD20+ B- cell lymphomas: a randomised controlled trial (RICOVER-60). Lancet Oncol 2008; 9: 105–116.
44.	Bonnet C, Fillet G, Mounier N et al. CHOP alone compared with CHOP plus radiotherapy for localized aggressive lymphoma in elderly patients: a study by the Groupe d’Etude des Lymphomes de l’Adulte. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 787–792.
45.	Held G, Murawski N, Ziepert M et al. Role of radiotherapy to bulky disease in elderly patients with aggressive B-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 1112–1118.
46.	Pfreundschuh M, Poeschel V, Zeynalova S et al. Optimization of rituximab for the treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (II): extended rituximab exposure time in the SMARTE-R-CHOP-14 trial of the German high-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma study group. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 4127–4133.
47.	Morrison VA, Hamlin P, Soubeyran P et al. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in the elderly: impact of prognosis, comorbidities, geriatric assessment, and supportive care on clinical practice. An International Society of Geriatric Oncology (SIOG) Expert Position Paper. J Geriatr Oncol 2015; 6: 141–152.
48.	Tucci A, Martelli M, Rigacci L et al. Comprehensive geriatric assessment is an essential tool to support treatment decisions in elderly patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: a prospective multicenter evaluation in 173 patients by the Lymphoma Italian Foundation (FIL). Leuk Lymphoma 2015; 56: 921–926.
 

49.	Spina M, Balzarotti M, Uziel L et al. Modulated chemotherapy according to modiﬁed comprehensive geriatric assessment in 100 consecutive elderly patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Oncologist 2012; 17: 838–846.
50.	Peyrade F, Jardin F, Thieblemont C et al. Attenuated immunochemotherapy regimen (R-miniCHOP) in elderly patients older than 80 years with diffuse large B- cell lymphoma: a multicentre, single-arm, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2011; 12: 460–468.
51.	Fields PA, Townsend W, Webb A et al. De novo treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, gemcitabine, and prednisolone in patients with cardiac comorbidity: a United Kingdom National Cancer Research Institute trial. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 282–287.
52.	Kridel R, Dietrich PY. Prevention of CNS relapse in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Lancet Oncol 2011; 12: 1258–1266.
53.	Savage KJ, Zeynalova S, Kansara RR et al. Validation of a prognostic model to assess the risk of CNS disease in patients with aggressive B-cell lymphoma. Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts) 2014; 124: 394.
54.	Tilly H, Lepage E, Coifﬁer B et al. Intensive conventional chemotherapy (ACVBP regimen) compared with standard CHOP for poor-prognosis aggressive non- Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2003; 102: 4284–4289.
55.	Abramson JS, Hellmann M, Barnes JA et al. Intravenous methotrexate as central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis is associated with a low risk of CNS recurrence in high-risk patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Cancer 2010; 116: 4283–4290.
56.	Cheah CY, Herbert KE, O’Rourke K et al. A multicentre retrospective comparison of central nervous system prophylaxis strategies among patients with high-risk diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Br J Cancer 2014; 111: 1072–1079.
57.	Coutinho R, Pria AD, Gandhi S et al. HIV status does not impair the outcome of patients diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with R-CHOP in the cART era. AIDS 2014; 28: 689–697.
58.	Seto WK, Chan TS, Hwang YY et al. Hepatitis B reactivation in patients with previous hepatitis B virus exposure undergoing rituximab-containing chemotherapy for lymphoma: a prospective study. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 3736–3743.
59.	Meignan M, Itti E, Gallamini A, Haioun C. Interim 18F-ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: qualitative or quantitative interpretation—where do we stand? Leuk Lymphoma 2009; 50: 1753–1756.
60.	Maurer MJ, Ghesquieres H, Jais JP et al. Event-free survival at 24 months is a robust end point for disease-related outcome in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with immunochemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 1066–1073.
61.	Thompson CA, Ghesquieres H, Maurer MJ et al. Utility of routine post-therapy surveillance imaging in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 3506–3512.
62.	Chien SH, Liu CJ, Hu YW et al. Frequency of surveillance computed tomography in non-Hodgkin lymphoma and the risk of secondary primary malignancies: a nationwide population-based study. Int J Cancer 2015; 137: 658–665.
63.	Gisselbrecht C, Glass B, Mounier N et al. Salvage regimens with autologous transplantation for relapsed large B-cell lymphoma in the rituximab era. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 4184–4190.
64.	Horwitz SM, Negrin RS, Blume KG et al. Rituximab as adjuvant to high-dose therapy and autologous hematopoietic cell transplantation for aggressive non- Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2004; 103: 777–783.
65.	Kewalramani T, Zelenetz AD, Nimer SD et al. Rituximab and ICE as second-line therapy before autologous stem cell transplantation for relapsed or primary refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Blood 2004; 103: 3684–3688.
66.	Crump M, Kuruvilla J, Couban S et al. Randomized comparison of gemcitabine, dexamethasone, and cisplatin versus dexamethasone, cytarabine, and cisplatin chemotherapy before autologous stem-cell transplantation for relapsed and refractory aggressive lymphomas: NCIC-CTG LY.12. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 3490–3496.
67.	Thieblemont C, Briere J, Mounier N et al. The germinal center/activated B-cell subclassiﬁcation has a prognostic impact for response to salvage therapy in relapsed/refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: a bio-CORAL study. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 4079–4087.
 

68.	Gisselbrecht C, Schmitz N, Mounier N et al. Rituximab maintenance therapy after autologous stem-cell transplantation in patients with relapsed CD20(+) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: ﬁnal analysis of the collaborative trial in relapsed aggressive lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 4462–4469.
69.	Glass B, Hasenkamp J, Wulf G et al. Rituximab after lymphoma-directed conditioning and allogeneic stem-cell transplantation for relapsed and refractory aggressive non- Hodgkin lymphoma (DSHNHL R3): an open-label, randomised, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 757–766.
70.	Mounier N, El Gnaoui T, Tilly H et al. Rituximab plus gemcitabine and oxaliplatin in patients with refractory/relapsed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma who are not candidates for high-dose therapy. A phase II Lymphoma Study Association trial. Haematologica 2013; 98: 1726–1731.
71.	Pettengell R, Coifﬁer B, Narayanan G et al. Pixantrone dimaleate versus other chemotherapeutic agents as a single-agent salvage treatment in patients with relapsed or refractory aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a phase 3, multicentre, open-label, randomised trial. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: 696–706.
72.	Dickinson M, Hoyt R, Roberts AW et al. Improved survival for relapsed diffuse large B cell lymphoma is predicted by a negative pre-transplant FDG-PET scan following salvage chemotherapy. Br J Haematol 2010; 150: 39–45.
73.	Molina TJ, Canioni D, Copie-Bergman C et al. Young patients with non-germinal center B-cell-like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma beneﬁt from intensiﬁed chemotherapy with ACVBP plus rituximab compared with CHOP plus rituximab: analysis of data from the Groupe d’Etudes des Lymphomes de l’Adulte/lymphoma study association phase III trial LNH 03–2B. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 3996–4003.
74.	Dunleavy K, Pittaluga S, Czuczman MS et al. Differential efﬁcacy of bortezomib plus chemotherapy within molecular subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Blood 2009; 113: 6069–6076.
75.	Hernandez-Ilizaliturri FJ, Deeb G, Zinzani PL et al. Higher response to lenalidomide in relapsed/refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in nongerminal center B-cell-like than in germinal center B-cell-like phenotype. Cancer 2011; 117: 5058–5066.
76.	Czuczman MS, Davies A, Linton KM et al. A phase 2/3 multicenter, randomized study comparing the efﬁcacy and safety of lenalidomide versus investigator’s choice in relapsed/refractory DLBCL. Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts) 2014; 124: 628.
77.	Vitolo U, Chiappella A, Franceschetti S et al. Lenalidomide plus R-CHOP21 in elderly patients with untreated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: results of the REAL07 open-label, multicentre, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 730–737.
78.	Nowakowski GS, LaPlant B, Macon WR et al. Lenalidomide combined with R- CHOP overcomes negative prognostic impact of non-germinal center B-cell phenotype in newly diagnosed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 251–257.
79.	Younes A, Thieblemont C, Morschhauser F et al. Combination of ibrutinib with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) for treatment-naive patients with CD20-positive B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a non-randomised, phase 1b study. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 1019–1026.
80.	Swerdlow SH. Diagnosis of "double hit" diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and B-cell lymphoma, unclassiﬁable, with features intermediate Burkitt lymphoma: when and how, FISH versus IHC. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2014; 2014: 90–99.
81.	Oki Y, Noorani M, Lin P et al. Double hit lymphoma: the MD Anderson Cancer Center clinical experience. Br J Haematol 2014; 166: 891–901.
82.	Petrich AM, Gandhi M, Jovanovic B et al. Impact of induction regimen and stem cell transplantation on outcomes in double-hit lymphoma: a multicenter retrospective analysis. Blood 2014; 124: 2354–2361.
83.	Intlekofer AM, Younes A. Precision therapy for lymphoma—current state and future directions. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2014; 11: 585–596.
84.	Dunleavy K, Roschewski M, Wilson WH. Precision treatment of distinct molecular subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: ascribing treatment based on the molecular phenotype. Clin Cancer Res 2014; 20: 5182–5193.
85.	Jardin F. Next generation sequencing and the management of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: from whole exome analysis to targeted therapy. Discov Med 2014; 18: 51–65.
86.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
