
 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
 
Annals of Oncology 28 (Supplement 4): iv1–iv21, 2017 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx222
 

 

 

P. E. Postmus1, K. M. Kerr2, M. Oudkerk3, S. Senan4, D. A. Waller5, J. Vansteenkiste6, C. Escriu1 & S. Peters7, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1The Clatterbridge Cancer Centre and Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital, Liverpool; 2University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK; 3Center for Medical Imaging, University of Groningen, Groningen; 4Department of Radiation Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 5Department of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Leicester, UK; 6University Hospitals KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 7Oncology Department, Service d’Oncologie Me´dicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via L. Taddei 4, CH-6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: March 2010, last update May 2017. This publication supersedes the previously published version—Ann Oncol 2013; 24 (Suppl. 6): vi89–vi98.


 

 
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide with 1.8 million newly diagnosed cases, or 13% of all cancers diagnosed, in 2012 [1]. The worldwide numbers are still rising despite an ongoing small decline in the Western world. Global statistics estimate that 15% of lung cancers in men and 53% in women are not attributable to smoking, overall accounting for 25% [2].


Screening for lung cancer
Lung cancer symptoms occur late in the disease, so the majority of patients with lung cancer present with advanced disease. Unfortunately for those patients, the disease will not be curable with currently available therapies. Therefore, early detection might be a valuable approach to detect the disease at an earlier, asymptomatic and potentially curable stage. Screening evaluated in relatively small trials failed to show benefit if periodical chest X-ray and/or sputum cytology were used; screening by these tech- niques is therefore not recommended.
The much larger National Lung Cancer Screening Trial (NLST) comparing low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) to chest X-ray in over 53 000 current or former heavy smokers (≥ 30
pack-years or ≤ 15 years since smoking cessation), aged between
55 and 74 years, showed a 20% reduction in lung cancer-related
death and an overall all-cause mortality reduction of 6.7% [3]. LDCT screening thus reduces lung cancer-related mortality. However, this positive outcome generates new questions on the
 
rate of overdiagnosis of indolent cancers, such as lepidic adeno- carcinomas (previously named bronchioloalveolar carcinoma) [4, 5], although a pathology review according to the recent classi- fication [6] made this unlikely, as it categorised 97% of the de- tected cancers as invasive [7].
How screening for lung cancer should become part of standard evidence-based practice therefore needs to be analysed further. Nevertheless, for part of the Western world this positive trial has resulted in guidelines for screening within high-risk groups [8, 9]. Implementation in other health care systems has not yet happened as confirmation of the results in a comparable trial in a different geographical area is crucial. Mature data of the NELSON study [10] are expected in 2017 and may result in con- firmation. The NELSON study developed a non-invasive proto- col based on volume measurement and growth rate resulting in a 10-fold reduction of the false-positive rate compared to the NLST, maintaining the same lung cancer detection rate [11].
An important question is how to translate the findings of both NLST and NELSON into advice on ‘who to screen’ (high-risk group), ‘how often’ (intervals between rounds), and ‘for how long’ (until which age). It is difficult to come to conclusions on how to perform screening for the detection of incidence cases as a screening study initially mainly deals with prevalence cases and the trial runs during a limited period of time. Questions such as, ‘what is the optimal time between screening rounds?’, and ‘for how long should this be continued?’, are difficult to answer, be- cause the characteristics of tumours detected during the preva- lence screening might differ from tumours detected during incidence screening [12]. Furthermore, findings detected during
 

VC   The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
earlier screening rounds provide further possibilities for risk stratifications and may lead to guidance on the length of screen- ing [13].
 

Recommendations:
•	Screening with LDCT reduces lung cancer-related mortality [I, A]. It is not yet ready for large-scale implementation, mainly because the lung cancer mortality reduction rate lacks deﬁnite proof of a second study result, and partly because of remaining questions regarding deﬁnition of the at-risk popu- lation, timing, interval and method of computed tomography (CT, especially 2D versus 3D evaluation), how to handle (false-) positive ﬁndings and especially cost-effectiveness, notably in relation to smoking cessation [I, A].
•	LDCT screening can be carried out outside a clinical trial pro- vided it is offered within a dedicated programme with quality control, in a centre with experience in CT screening, a large vol- ume of thoracic oncology activity and multidisciplinary manage- ment of suspicious ﬁndings [I, B]. Candidates are current or former heavy smokers ( 30 pack-years or 15 years since smoking cessation) aged 55–74 years, who are well informed about potential beneﬁts and risks. Individuals offered LDCT screening should be referred to a smoking cessation programme.
•	LDCT screening should not be offered on an ad hoc individ-
ual basis, but patients requesting screening should be referred to a dedicated programme, as recommended above [V, B].
•	Other screening methods, such as chest X-ray, sputum analysis or biomarkers are not recommended for clinical use [I, C].



 
Diagnosis

The most common diagnostic test for lung cancer is fibreoptic bronchoscopy, often extended with evaluation of regional lymph nodes by endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) and/or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS). In most cases this will be sufficient to diagnose non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), although quite often the amount of obtained material is not sufficient to sub-classify the tumour in more detail.
For earlier stages of NSCLC, the need for a detailed pretreatment pathological diagnosis is not yet clear. In contrast to stage IV [14], the consequences of the upfront diagnosis for se- lecting the most effective therapy of stages I–III NSCLC are assumed to be less relevant.
For molecular analysis, the sample obtained through EBUS- guided aspirations of lymph nodes is often sufficient [15]. Commonly used tests are summarised in Table 1.

Pathology
As pathologists will not necessarily be aware of the disease stage at the time of pathological diagnosis, a thorough comprehensive diagnosis is always recommended whenever possible.
The recent World Health Organization (WHO) classification, with its further sub-classification of (surgically resected) adeno- carcinoma, shows differences in metastatic pattern, recurrence and survival between different histological subtypes [16]. This
 







becomes even more relevant as different histological subtypes dif- fer with regards to metastatic pattern, recurrence and survival. The beneficial effects of adjuvant chemotherapy (ChT) post- resection may differ depending upon this adenocarcinoma sub- classification [17–19]; prospective trials are needed to evaluate whether these retrospective findings have clinical consequences.
The pathological classification at diagnosis may influence ini- tial treatment decisions such as the initial surgical approach. In a large surgical series (n ¼ 2268) of resected adenocarcinoma of
≤ 3 cm in diameter, the categories adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS),
minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (MIA) and lepidic predom-
inant (Lep) were found to have no metastasis in N1 or N2 lymph nodes (n ¼ 329), whereas the other categories with predominance of acinar, papillary, micropapillary or solid growth patterns had N1 or N2 involvement in 22.9% of patients (445 of 1939). Until
now, these features are only detectable in full extent in resected material; further refining of preoperative work-up might make this applicable for prospective use [20]. Future work may deter- mine if the extent of surgery could be limited to a segmentectomy in the AIS and MIA subtypes, and a lobectomy could be
 
performed with lymph node dissection for the invasive types. Such decisions could be based on intra-operative frozen section examination, which has a high concordance rate with final path- ology [21], but is far from being a validated standard practice due to several technical and logistical problems [22–24].
Preoperative diagnostic work-up may identify patients at higher risk for presence of regional lymph node metastases. By measuring primary tumour low maximum standardised uptake values (SUVmax) of fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tom-
ography (FDG-PET) (< 3.0), it was possible to detect those cases with low probability of mediastinal lymph node metastases, and
to select the suitable candidates for a sublobar resection [25]; however, this needs to be confirmed in comparable studies before it can be concluded that a low SUVmax value of a peripheral tu- mour is useful for selection of patients for a sublobar resection.
If bronchoscopy or transthoracic needle biopsy results in large (≥ 0.7 mm2) and multiple (≥ 2) biopsies, the concordance with the final tumour classification after resection is ~70% overall.
For the acinar type, concordance was low, whereas the others were more favourable, but still relatively low at ~70% [26]. These types of study require further validation. Based on these observa- tions, and for other reasons, the idea of ‘minimal amounts of tissue
to come to a diagnosis’ of cancer needs to be re-evaluated, and probably changed to ‘as much tissue as possible’ to allow better diagnosis and classification as early as possible in the trajectory to therapeutic decisions. In general, the rate of NOS (not otherwise
specified) after the complete diagnostic work-up should be <10%.

Recommendations:
•	In patients with clinical stages I–III lesions, a pretreatment pathological diagnosis is recommended prior to any curative treatment.
•	Bronchoscopy is the recommended test to obtain a patho- logical diagnosis of centrally located tumours in stages I–III with biopsy of any visible lesion [III, A].
•	The pathological classiﬁcation NOS should be used only in cases where it is impossible to obtain enough tissue for fur- ther classiﬁcation, or when steps to further classify the tu- mour are inconclusive [V, A].
•	An exception to the requirement for a pretreatment diagnosis can be made if an experienced multidisciplinary group de- cides that the risks of obtaining pathology may be unaccept- able in a patient in whom the likelihood of malignancy is high based on clinical and imaging ﬁndings [III, B].
•	A pretreatment pathological diagnosis is strongly recom- mended for all patients before stereotactic ablative radiother- apy (SABR), unless a multidisciplinary tumour board is of the opinion that the risk-beneﬁt ratio of the procedure is un- acceptable. In such a situation, the predicted likelihood of malignancy should preferably be at least 85%, based upon ac- cepted criteria [III, B] [25].
•	The descriptive element of the recent WHO classiﬁcation of adenocarcinoma subtypes should be used to describe bron- choscopic and CT-guided biopsies whenever possible [III, A].
•	The revised adenocarcinoma classiﬁcation may identify pa- tient subtypes for whom an anatomical sublobar resection, rather than lobectomy, would be sufﬁcient [III, A].
•	FDG-PET may contribute for the selection of patients for ana- tomical sublobar resections as low SUVmax values of peripheral
 
tumours indicate lack of mediastinal metastases [III, A]. This diagnosis may be made intra-operatively by video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy and frozen section analysis.
•	In isolated cases a diagnostic anatomical sublobar resection may be acceptable.

The solitary pulmonary nodule
Solitary pulmonary nodules are a common problem and are usually a diagnostic challenge. Depending on presence or lack of benign characteristics, such as calcification or no changes during at least 2 years, a diagnostic algorithm can be used to qualify the lesion as more or less likely to be malignant. However, it is important to note that validated diagnostic algorithms are not available in many populations. Guidelines developed by the British Thoracic Society (BTS) and the Fleischner Society were published recently [27, 28], but like many previous guidelines, have focussed on Western popu- lations. For other areas, such as Asia, with a high prevalence of granulomatous disease and other infectious causes of pulmonary nodules, the recent Asian consensus guidelines are likely more ap- propriate. The latter recommend a lesser reliance on positron emis- sion tomography (PET) scans in Asian populations, and greater use of non-surgical biopsy over surgical diagnosis or surveillance [29].
In general, it is important for clinicians to be aware of the em- phasis they would place on a ‘non-malignant’ result from a per- cutaneous biopsy. If the clinical and radiological evidence would favour a surgical biopsy in any case, then the merits of non- invasive methods should be discussed with the patient.
Recent data from the NELSON study on incidental nodules might be applied to the solitary nodule and incorporated in guidelines [12]. Diagnostic procedures, as described in the previ- ous section, will be of help in case further evaluation is needed.

Recommendations:
•	The diagnostic approach to non-calciﬁed pulmonary nodules should be based on existing standard guidelines [III, A], al- though new evidence on nodule management is emerging.
•	Likelihood of malignancy based upon risk calculation meth- ods used in CT screening studies should be used only to guide the clinical assessment of pulmonary nodules detected in the wider population [V, C].


 
During the 16th World Congress of Lung Cancer, the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) presented the revised tumour, node and metastasis (TNM) classification of malignant tumours (UICC TNM 8), published in December 2016 [30] and effective since January 2017 (Table 2).

Recommendation:
•	In non-metastatic NSCLC, detailed locoregional staging accord- ing to the 8th TNM staging system and the cardiopulmonary ﬁt- ness of the patient determine the choice of treatment [III, A].

Locoregional staging
For locoregional staging, algorithms shown in Figures 1 and 2 are still applicable.
 

Table 2. Staging and stage grouping UICC TNM 8 [30]
Occult carcinoma	TX	N0	M0
Stage 0	Tis	N0	M0
Stage IA1	T1a(mi)	N0	M0
	T1a	N0	M0
Stage IA2	T1b	N0	M0
Stage IA3	T1c	N0	M0
Stage IB	T2a	N0	M0
Stage IIA	T2b	N0	M0
Stage IIB	T1a–c	N1	M0
	T2a–b	N1	M0
	T3	N0	M0
Stage IIIA	T1a–c	N2	M0
	T2a–b	N2	M0
	T3	N1	M0
	T4	N0	M0
	T4	N1	M0
Stage IIIB	T1a–c	N3	M0
	T2a–b	N3	M0
	T3	N2	M0
	T4	N2	M0
Stage IIIC	T3	N3	M0
	T4	N3	M0
 	
UICC, Union for International Cancer Control; TNM, tumour, node and metastasis.
Reprinted from [30] with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


The two most striking changes in UICC TNM 8 are the further subdividing and detailing of both T and M stage, although the consequences for therapeutic approach are not yet obvious in all situations.
The T stage was divided further by splitting T1 into three sub- groups based on size (T1a ≤ 1 cm, T1b > 1 cm to ≤ 2 cm, T1c > 2 cm to ≤ 3 cm), this is continued into T2 (T2a > 3 cm to ≤ 4 cm, T2b > 4 cm to ≤ 5 cm), T3 (> 5 cm to ≤ 7 cm) and T4 (> 7 cm). The T2 category was further enriched by adding the previous T3 classifiers, atelectasis/pneumonitis and/or involve-
ment of main bronchus, irrespective of distance to main carina. Invasion of the diaphragm was found to have a similar prognosis as other T4 tumours and has therefore been added to this cat- egory [31].
In addition to a further refinement of T stage overall, a number of questions that were—despite the major improvements—left unanswered in the UICC TNM 7 classification, have now been addressed, and should therefore be incorporated in a new guideline.
How to code and measure T and what size should be used? The new pathology classification for adenocarcinoma [6, 16] proposed that AIS be classified as Tis (AIS) and that MIA be coded as T1mi. For part-solid tumours the size of the invasive component should be used to assign the T category for clinical staging; however, the whole size of the tumour should also be recorded. Pathological staging might be challenging in the situation of lepidic growth, and therefore, interaction with radiology might be needed to score the invasive (solid) component. The display is best with wide (lung) window settings, particularly in the case of subsolid lesions. For
 
measuring the solid component of tumours, expert opinion fa- vours lung or intermediate window settings [32].
CT follow-up studies have shown that incidental non-calcified non-solid lung lesions do not need shorter repeat CT examin- ations than 1–2 years and are definitely less aggressive than solid or part-solid lesions and often even indolent.
The use of the staging system for tumours with additional nod- ules has been left unchanged, although the approach to score same lobe nodules as T3, different ipsilateral lobe as T4 and contralateral as M1a should be restricted to the same histological (sub)type and, as such, be considered as intrapulmonary metasta- ses [33]. In other situations, with more than one pulmonary site of disease, such as second primary tumours, these should be staged differently. To conclude if two foci are indeed two differ- ent primaries is difficult; criteria are presented but often it will be impossible to come to a definitive conclusion and the role of a multidisciplinary tumour board is important [34]. When the conclusion is the presence of two primaries, each tumour should be given a separate T, N and M category [35].
A specific problem is the tumour with a specific growth pattern, such as ground glass or lepidic, and the pneumonic type. The International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) proposes to determine the T of multifocal ground glass/lepidic tu- mours by the highest T-lesion, with either the number of tumours or m in parentheses to denote the multifocal nature, and that a single N and M category be used for all these lesions collectively. In daily practice, simply using m is to be preferred over trying to estimate the number of groundglass opacity (GGO) areas. For the pneumonic type, it is suggested to use size (or T3) if in one lobe, T4 if involving a different ipsilateral lobe, and M1a if contralateral; in that situation, the T stage will be based on the highest category in the most involved lung. For N and M, a single category should be used for all pulmonary areas of involvement [36]. Especially in the case where more than one lesion is present, and/or differences in growth pattern are observed [34–36], accurate staging is vital to avoid erroneous interpretations leading to a false stage, resulting in undertreatment.
For patients with abnormal mediastinal and/or hilar lymph nodes at CT and/or PET, endosonography is recommended over surgical staging [I, A]. If malignant nodal involvement is not found by this modality, subsequent surgical staging is recom- mended [I, B]. For peripheral tumours without mediastinal in- volvement on CT or PET-CT, mediastinal staging is advised in case of no uptake of FDG by the primary tumour and/or a tu-
mour size ≥ 3 cm [II, C] [37].
The proposed new staging suggests leaving the N categories un-
changed, but to record for future testing the sub-classification of single (N1a, N2a) or multiple (N1b, N2b) affected nodes. For the situation of so-called skip metastases, the N2a group is further divided into N2a1 (no N1) and N2a2 (with N1) [38]. Incorporation of specific consequences related to the new path- ology classification [6, 16] and, through that, recognising specific categories with a much higher incidence of mediastinal metasta-
ses, even if the tumour size is < 3 cm [20], remains to be confirmed.
A specific problem is whether it is necessary to evaluate the possible existence of brain metastases by brain magnetic reson- ance imaging (MRI). There is some controversy between existing guidelines: The National Comprehensive Cancer Network
 

 

Figure 1. Suggested algorithm for locoregional lymph node staging in patients with non-metastatic NSCLC.
CT, computed tomography; EBUS, endoscopic bronchial ultrasound; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; FDG, ﬂuorodeoxyglucose; LN, lymph node; NPV, negative predictive value; NSCLC, non-small-cell lung cancer; PET, positron emission tomography; VAM, video-assisted mediastinoscopy. Reprinted from [137] with permission.

 
(NCCN) advises this for all patients except for those with stage IA [39], the BTS and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) for all patients considered for curative therapy [40, 41], whereas the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) restricts it to stage III/IV and symptomatic patients [42].
Whether this is cost-effective is unclear as the detection rate of brain metastases is very low [43].

Recommendations:
•	For part-solid tumours, the size of the invasive component should be used to assign the T category for clinical staging [III, A].
•	Subsolid lesions need dedicated radiological expertise for evaluating the lung lesion composition [V, A].
•	If two lung lesions fulﬁl the criteria for two primaries these should be evaluated and treated accordingly [III, A].
•	For patients with abnormal mediastinal and/or hilar lymph nodes at CT and/or PET, endosonography is recommended over surgical staging [I, A].
•	The preferred ﬁrst technique for pathological conﬁrmation of suspect nodes is needle aspiration under EBUS and/or EUS guidance [I, A].
 
•	If EBUS and/or EUS does not reveal nodal involvement in a situ- ation of high clinical suspicion, mediastinoscopy is indicated [I, A].
•	Mediastinoscopy is the test with the highest negative predict- ive value to rule out mediastinal lymph node disease [I, A].
•	Screening for brain metastases by MRI might be useful in pa- tients considered for curative therapy [III, B].

Pretreatment risk assessment
Any locoregional therapy must consider the pre-therapy situ- ation of the patient but, even more importantly, their predicted post-treatment status. Most patients are older than 65 years of age and may have age- and life-style-related comorbidity. A therapeutic intervention for lung cancer will reduce the pul- monary and vascular reserve capacity, either acutely following re- section, or more gradually following radiotherapy (RT). This functional loss needs to be estimated pre-therapy to determine whether an individual patient is able to cope with it and to main- tain an acceptable quality of life.
For surgical candidates, algorithms for pretreatment evaluation have been developed and are used widely (Figure 3) [41, 44]. The
 



 




























Figure 2. Treatment recommendations for patients with locoregional NSCLC, based on imaging, invasive lymph node staging tests and multidisciplinary assessment.
*Category description according to CT imaging as in ACCP staging document [42].
**See text for factors involved in the choice between non-surgical and surgical multimodality treatment.
ACCP, American College of Chest Physicians; CT, computed tomography; LN, lymph node; NSCLC, non-small-cell lung cancer; PET, positron-emission tomography.
 

Both
> 80 %
Either one < 80%
 
 
< 35 % or	 	
 
 	    > 75% or     	
 
<10 mL·kg–1·min–1	> 20 mL·kg–1·min–1
35%-75% or
10-20 mL·kg–1·min–1

Both > 30%

At least one < 30%
 
< 35% or
< 10 mL·kg–1·min–1

> 35% or
> 10 mL·kg–1·min–1
Figure 3. Preoperative respiratory evaluation.
DLCO, diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; ppo, predicted postoperative; VO2, oxygen consumption.
Reprinted from [50], with permission from the European Respiratory Society.

 
relative risk of postoperative morbidity and mortality can be pre- dicted from preoperative forced expiratory volume in the first se- cond (FEV1) and diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). Patients with lower values might benefit from a more extensive assessment through pulmonary exercise testing.
When maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max) is < 10 mL/kg/ min, patients are potentially at high risk for serious postoperative
complications [III, A]. Surgical resection is usually acceptable if the predicted postoperative FEV1 and DLCO values are > 40%. This can be estimated from the number of bronchopulmonary seg- ments to be resected taking into account the regional distribution of ventilation and perfusion. The problematic area is where no real
guidelines exist, or the standard is not directly applicable, as resec- tion of poorly functioning parts of the lung might improve the situation instead of making it worse (Figure 4) [45].
The risk of in-hospital death can be estimated by a scoring sys- tem such as Thoracoscore [46]; however, it was designed for a general population and its value for use in cancer patients is limited.
 
Evaluation of the cardiac risk assessment for lung resections by the recalibrated thoracic revised cardiac risk index (RCRI) is recommended (Table 3) [47], as it has been validated in this setting [48]. Schematic description of the steps to be taken for evaluating these aspects is given in Figure 5 (the fig- ure is based on the original RCRI rather than the recalibrated RCRI).
Evaluating all these pros and cons should be done within a multidisciplinary team and in consultation with the patient. Concentration of expertise will certainly improve decision- making and be of benefit for treatment outcomes [49].
Unfortunately, the predicted tolerance for high-dose RT is less well defined and it is, in general, impossible to accurately deter- mine the related acute and long-term risks [50]. Based on the known adverse effects of RT on vasculature and cardiac function, the dose to the heart should be minimised during RT planning [51–53].
In general, it is necessary to evaluate and optimise any comor- bidities before planned surgery [41]; furthermore, trying to
 

 










Figure 4. Algorithm for patients with clinical stage I lung cancer and limited pulmonary function due to emphysema.
CT, computed tomography; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; FEV1, forced expiratory volume 1; FVC, forced vital capacity; ILD, interstitial lung disease; IPF, idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis; LVRS, lung volume reduction surgery; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; RV, reserve vol- ume; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; TLC, total lung capacity.
Reprinted from [45], with permission from Elsevier.

 
optimise a patient’s condition prior to surgery is beneficial, espe- cially for those with a poor preoperative condition [54].

Recommendations:
•	In non-metastatic NSCLC, the cardiopulmonary ﬁtness of the patient will determine the choice of treatment [III, A].
 
•	The risk of postoperative morbidity and mortality can be esti- mated using risk-speciﬁc models, although none have been validated in a cancer population [III, B].
•	Before considering surgical resection, precise assessment of cardiac and pulmonary function is necessary to estimate risk of operative morbidity [III, A].
 

 


•	For cardiac assessment, use of recalibrated RCRI is recom- mended [III, A].
•	Formal lung function testing should be undertaken to estimate postoperative lung function. For patients with FEV1 and DLCO values > 80% of their predicted pulmonary function
tests and no other major comorbidities, no further investiga-
tions are advised before surgical resection [III, A]. For others, exercise testing and split lung function are recommended. In these patients, VO2max can be used to measure exercise cap- acity and predict postoperative complications [III, A].
•	Comorbidities should be evaluated and optimised before sur- gery [III, A].
•	In patients with limited pulmonary function due to emphysema, a lung volume reduction effect may be observed by resection of the lung cancer within emphysematous lung tissue [III, B].


 
Surgery

The cornerstone of treatment of potentially resectable lung cancer is surgical removal of the tumour [55]. For those who are not will- ing to accept the risks, or are at very high risk, curative RT should be offered, either SABR or hypofractionated high-dose RT.
Based on the Lung Cancer Study Group (LCSG) 821 trial, lobec- tomy is the current treatment of choice for T1 tumours as the local recurrence rate after a more limited resection (segmentectomy or wedge resection) was found to be higher [56]. This study should be viewed within the context that staging and surgical methods have progressed significantly since its publication more than two decades ago. Whether the conclusions are still applicable for smaller lesions (T1a) seems uncertain, research based on large databases suggest a (limited) practice change [57]. In squamous cell carcinoma, lobec- tomy is superior to segmentectomy or wedge resection. For adeno- carcinoma, wedge resection was inferior to lobectomy, whereas
 
segmentectomy resulted in equivalent outcomes [57]. The same outcome of segmentectomy and lobectomy was reported in patients with radiologically pure solid cT1a adenocarcinomas [58]. As dis- cussed in the section on diagnosis and pathology, the different types of adenocarcinoma have evolved in differences in metastatic pat- tern, recurrence and survival, and based on this, one might expect that a limited resection will be adequate in the least invasive sub- types [20, 21]. Currently two phase III studies (CALGB 140503, and JCOG0802/WJOG4607L) are recruiting [59] and waiting to mature after accrual had been reached [60], respectively.
Whether surgery should be done through standard open thora- cotomy, or a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) proced- ure, is probably less important from oncological perspective [61], since comparative margin clearance and nodal dissection can be achieved. A point of concern might be the extent of lymph node staging [62]. For patients, the major benefit is the reduced postop- erative morbidity and mortality, resulting in improved quality of life and making VATS the more attractive approach [63].
The management of lymph nodes during surgery is mainly dic- tated by the staging requirements for guaranteed ‘R0 resection’ status. This implies surgical evaluation of a minimum of six nodes/stations, three of which should be mediastinal, including the sub-carinal station, with no metastases found in most cranial resected nodes [64]. While in stage I cases, overall survival (OS), local recurrence rate and distant metastasis do not appear to be influenced by the method of lymph node assessment, systematic nodal dissection is recommended in stages II and IIIA [65]. Intraoperative nodal management may be influenced by the ex- tent of preoperative lymph node mapping, particularly prior negative mediastinoscopy.
Patients presenting with multiple primaries should be assessed with curative intent. Complete resection is recommended, but combinations of resection and SABR have been found to be ef- fective as well [66, 67].

Recommendations:
•	Surgery should be offered to all patients with stage I and II NSCLC as the preferred treatment to all who are willing to accept procedure-related risks [III, A].
•	For patients with a non-centrally located resectable tumour and absence of nodal metastasis on both CT and PET images, surgical resection is recommended [I, A].
•	Anatomical resection is preferred over wedge resection [I, A].
•	Anatomical segmentectomy is generally considered accept- able for pure GGO lesions or adenocarcinomas in situ or with minimal invasion [III, B].
•	Lobectomy is still considered the standard surgical treatment of tu- mours 2 cm in size that have a solid appearance on CT [II, B].
•	Lymph node dissection should conform to IASLC speciﬁca- tions for staging [III, A].
•	Either open thoracotomy or VATS access can be carried out as appropriate to the expertise of the surgeon [III, A].
•	VATS should be the approach of choice in stage I tumours [V, C].
•	For patients with multifocal lung cancer, complete resection is recommended whenever possible. All patients with multi- focal lung cancer should be discussed in a multidisciplinary tumour board [III, B].
 

 
Figure 5. Preoperative cardiac evaluation.
AHA/ACC, American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; ECG, electrocardiogram; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; RCRI, revised cardiac risk index; TIA, transient ischaemic attack.
Reprinted from [50], with permission from the European Respiratory Society.

 
Systemic therapy
In a period of about two decades, it has become clear that adjuvant ChT is of benefit for patients with N1 and N2 disease (stage II and III), resulting overall in 4%–5% absolute survival improvement at 5 years [68]. These results were obtained by administering cisplatin- based doublets, delivering at least 300 mg/m2 of cisplatin in three to four cycles. Although for the accompanying drug, most data are avail- able for the efficacy of vinorelbine, this does by no means exclude newer agents, with at least comparable efficacy, such as docetaxel, gemcitabine or pemetrexed. However, adding bevacizumab was not beneficial [69, 70]. Patient selection criteria for these studies, such as proper recovery from surgery and the absence of major comorbid- ities, are essential. Although in most studies the interval between sur- gery and the start of ChT was restricted to 6 weeks, a recent analysis of the National Cancer Database showed a comparable outcome in patients treated after a longer interval post-resection [71].
Its value in lower stages is less clear. For stage IA, postoperative ChT resulted in a worse outcome. In stage IB, a small overall benefit
 
was found [68], a subgroup analysis indicated it was mainly due to the outcome in patients with tumours > 4 cm [72, 73].
Neoadjuvant ChT has not been evaluated as extensively as
postoperative. However, comparing outcomes of both modalities did not reveal a major difference in OS [74, 75]. Its use might be beneficial as downstaging might be achieved [76], potentially resulting in a less extensive resection.
Predictive molecular markers have not been evaluated in pro- spective studies. For cases with mutation in epidermal growth fac- tor receptor (EGFR) there is limited evidence coming from a meta-analysis [77], two major trials are currently recruiting to an- swer this important question [78, 79]. Until these outcomes be- come available, targeted agents should not be used in the adjuvant setting. Adjuvant immunotherapy trials using anti-PD-1 and anti PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitors in stage I-III adjuvant setting (trials NCT NCT02504372 and NCT02273375) are ongoing. A neoadju- vant trial using anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD-1 in stage I-III neoadju- vant setting has been also recently initiated (NCT02998528).
 
Recommendations:
•	Adjuvant ChT should be offered to patients with resected stage II and III NSCLC [I, A] and can be considered in patients with resected stage IB disease and a primary tumour > 4 cm [II, B].
Pre-existing comorbidity, time from surgery and postoperative
recovery need to be taken into account in this decision taken in a multidisciplinary tumour board [V, A].
•	For adjuvant ChT, a two-drug combination with cisplatin is pref- erable [I, A]. In randomised studies, the attempted cumulative cis- platin dose was up to 300 mg/m2, delivered in three to four cycles. The most frequently studied regimen is cisplatin–vinorelbine.
•	At the present time, the choice of adjuvant therapy should not be guided by molecular analyses, e.g. ERCC1 mutation testing [IV, B].
•	In the current state of knowledge, targeted agents should not be used in the adjuvant setting [II, A].
•	In view of the equivalence of neoadjuvant and adjuvant ChT for OS, the consistent results and broad evidence base sup- port adjuvant ChT as the timing of choice [II, C].
•	(Neo)adjuvant anti-PD(L)-1 checkpoint inhibitors are cur- rently being evaluated in addition to current standard of care.

Primary radiotherapy
For patients with comorbidities or other reasons for inoperabil- ity, presenting with a peripherally located stage I NSCLC, or any patient refusing surgery, stereotactic radiotherapy [SABR or ster- eotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT)] is the preferred treatment, with local control rates of 90% at 5 years [80, 81].
Current SABR practice generally utilises small planning mar- gins based on 4-dimensional CT (4DCT), multiple radiation beams or arcs, all of which reduce the risk of normal organ tox- icity [82]. Acute treatment-related toxicity is uncommon, as de- terioration in quality of life [83]; however, the risk of high-grade and fatal toxicity is high in patients with pre-existing interstitial lung fibrosis and careful evaluation of the risks and benefits of the procedure by an expert tumour board is advised [84, 85].
Late toxicities reported in phase II trials include rib fractures [86], dyspnoea and ventricular tachycardia [80, 87].
In elderly patients, the introduction of SABR led to an im- provement in population-based survivals of patients with periph- erally located stage I, as well as a reduction of the number of untreated patients [88]. When SABR is unavailable, radical RT using hypofractionated schedules is preferred to the use of con- ventionally fractionated RT [89, 90].
Despite the available data on outcomes of SABR in patients with peripheral stage I tumours who are fit to undergo surgery [91, 92], there is currently no evidence to routinely recommend SABR for pa- tients who are at low risk for surgical complications. Three randomised clinical trials in this population failed to complete accrual, and results from four new trials will be forthcoming in the coming decade [93]. A pooled analysis of two of the closed trials, the STARS and ROSEL stud- ies, revealed comparable recurrence-free survival at 3 years [94]. Given the differences in early toxicity and quality of life between surgery and SABR, as well as the growing emphasis on patient reported endpoints when evaluating new treatments [95], more attention should be given towards developing tools for shared decision-making, as it may assist operable patients and their clinicians to define a management plan that is consistent with a patient’s preferences and values [96, 97].
 
With the introduction of SABR for operable stage I tumours, a new problem arises when recurrence of these tumours is detected during follow-up. In those with proven recurrence (or a high suspicion), the possibility of salvage surgery should be considered [98–105].
The IASLC has defined ‘central tumours’ as tumours located within 2 cm in all directions of any mediastinal critical structure, including the bronchial tree, oesophagus, heart, brachial plexus, major vessels, spinal cord, phrenic nerve and recurrent laryngeal nerve [106]. For tumours located in the hilar region, SABR using ‘risk-adapted’ fractionation schemes can achieve high local control rates with limited toxicity [107]. However, care should be taken to distinguish moderately central tumours from so-called ‘ultracen- tral’ lesions, a term used to describe a planning target volume that overlaps the trachea or main bronchi [108]. SABR is not appropri- ate for ultracentral tumours, as increased toxicity has already been reported for this subgroup, after conventional and hypo- fractionated RT schemes. Data from a completed prospective Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) study of SABR for moderately central tumour are expected in the near future, and until such time, a radical RT scheme using hypofractionated sched- ules can be considered an acceptable standard of care [89, 90].
Whether incorporating the new pathology classification [16], and the possible pretherapy detection of less invasive types [25, 26], would change recommendations for subgroups remains to be seen.

Recommendations:
•	The non-surgical treatment of choice for stage I NSCLC is SABR. The dose should be to a biologically equivalent tu- mour dose of 100 Gy, prescribed to the encompassing iso- dose [III, A].
•	SABR for early-stage peripheral lung tumours is associated with low toxicity in patients with chronic obstructive pul- monary disease (COPD) and the elderly [III, A].
•	Salvage surgery, if feasible, may be offered to patients having complications post-SABR [V, B].
•	Salvage surgery, if feasible, may be offered, using the same in- dications as for primary surgery in progressive disease after SABR, but surgery may be more difﬁcult with higher opera- tive risk [V, B].
•	For medically inoperable patients with tumours with a size > 5
cm and/or moderately central location, radical RT using more conventional or accelerated schedules is recommended [III, A].

Radiofrequency ablation
Fortunately, not many patients have contraindications for both surgery and SABR [85]. For these patients radiofrequency abla- tion (RFA) might be a reasonable alternative although the level of evidence comes from observational studies only [109].

Recommendation:
•	Stage I NSCLC patients with strong contraindications for sur- gery and/or SABR may be treated with RFA [V, C].

Postoperative radiotherapy
In a meta-analysis of rather old studies postoperative radiother- apy (PORT) was found to be detrimental if given to patients with N0 and N1 disease [110]. The case for unexpected N2 disease
 
discovered at surgery is less clear, and currently evaluated in a large clinical trial, applying 54 Gy in 27–30 fractions [111]. The use of PORT after an R1 resection appears reasonable, but it is not supported by high-quality evidence.

Recommendations:
•	PORT in completely resected early-stage NSCLC is not rec- ommended [I, A].
•	In case of R1 resection (positive resection margin, chest wall), PORT should be considered [IV, B].
•	Even if such patients were not included in randomised, clin- ical trials (RCTs), adjuvant ChT should be considered in pa- tients with R1 resection of stage IB disease and a primary
tumour > 4 cm, stage II and III [V, A].
•	In case both ChT and RT are administered post-surgery, RT
should be administered after ChT [V, C].


Adequate staging through PET-CT imaging is indicated to rule out extracranial metastasis. Evaluation of the brain by MRI is indicated.
Platinum-based ChT is an essential part of the treatment of lo- cally advanced NSCLC (LA-NSCLC) as it improves survival in tumours considered resectable, as well in unresectable tumours.

Recommendations:
•	All patients planned for deﬁnitive stage III NSCLC treatment should undergo a diagnostic contrast-enhanced CT scan of the chest and upper abdomen followed by a PET or a combined PET-CT with a CT technique with adequately high resolution for initial staging purposes [I, A] in order to rule out detectable extrathoracic, extracranial metastasis, and to assess potential mediastinal lymph node involvement, ideally within 4 weeks before the start of treatment [III, B]. Single PET-positive distant lesions need pathological conﬁrmation [V, B].
•	For patients with operable N2 disease, pathological staging of the mediastinum is advised [III, C].
•	All patients planned for curative stage III NSCLC treatment should receive brain imaging for initial staging [III, B]. Contrast-enhanced brain MRI is the preferred method for staging of the brain in stage III disease [III, A]. If it is not pos- sible to perform MRI, dedicated contrast-enhanced brain CT scan is advised [III, B].

Resectable LA-NSCLC
Resectable in this situation usually refers to the following situations:
•	single station N2 disease where other nodal stations have been biopsied and proved to be benign. Postoperative ChT should then be advised [112];
•	T4N0 tumours where nodal disease had been excluded by inva- sive methods when a R0 resection is considered to be feasible;
•	after induction therapy, when there has been nodal down- staging and a pneumonectomy can be avoided.
All such cases should be evaluated within an experienced multidisciplinary team.
 
The treatment of resectable LA-NSCLC remains a matter of de- bate. There is only one trial comparing the two locoregional modalities head-to-head, surgery and RT (60 Gy), in patients with at least a minimal tumour response [113], no difference in survival was found. In the Lung Intergroup Trial 0139, the induc- tion regimen of chemoradiotherapy (CRT) (45 Gy), was followed by surgery or definitive RT to a dose of 61 Gy [114]. No signifi- cant difference in OS was found, but disease-free survival was sig- nificantly better in the trimodality arm. An explanation for this difference is the higher early toxic death rate in the surgery arm, apparently due to the higher number of early postoperative deaths in the group of patients undergoing right-sided pneumon- ectomy. Excluding pneumonectomy for an unplanned subgroup analysis of matched surgical patients treated by lobectomy, the surgical patients had a better survival. Two more recent studies confirmed the outcomes with regard to disease-free survival and OS after induction therapy followed by surgery. The SAKK study failed to show benefit by adding relatively low doses of RT (45 Gy) to ChT [115], whereas the ESPATUE trial confirmed that CRT (45 Gy) followed by surgery, is as good as CRT with defini- tive RT (65–71 Gy) given as a boost in the last week of CRT [116]. As these studies showed no clear benefit for one of the local therapies over the other, the choice of local treatment modality
can vary across countries and centres.

Recommendations:
•	If, despite adequate mediastinal staging procedures, N2 dis- ease is only documented intra-operatively, surgery should be followed by adjuvant ChT [I, A]. In case of complete resec- tion, addition of PORT is not routinely recommended, but may be an option following individual risk assessment [V, C].
•	If single station N2 disease can be demonstrated by preoperative pathological nodal analysis, resection followed by adjuvant ChT, induction ChT followed by surgery or induction CRT followed by surgery are options. If induction ChT alone is given preopera- tively, PORT is not standard treatment, but may be an option based on critical evaluation of locoregional relapse risks [IV, C].
•	In multistation N2 or N3, concurrent deﬁnitive CRT is preferred [I, A]. An experienced multidisciplinary team is of paramount importance in any complex multimodality treatment strategy de- cision, including the role of surgery in these cases [IV, C].
•	In potentially resectable superior sulcus tumours, concurrent CRT induction followed by deﬁnitive surgery is the treatment of choice [III, A]. The same strategy may be applied for potentially resectable T3 or T4 central tumours in highly selected cases and experienced centres [III, B]. In both situations, surgery should be carried out within 4 weeks after the end of RT [III, B].

Systemic therapy
Which ChT is optimal has not been investigated extensively. In fact, information coming from studies in stage IV has hardly been applied in this situation, probably the only exception being the PROCLAIM study, evaluating the use of pemetrexed-cisplatin versus standard cisplatin-etoposide, but failing to show any im- provement except for less haematological toxicity [117]. Consolidation ChT after CRT failed to improve progression-free survival (PFS) [118]. There is no beneficial role for induction ChT before CRT [119], although in many centres for practical
 
reasons, related to planning of RT, one cycle will be given prior to concurrent CRT. Adjuvant immunotherapy trials, using anti- PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitors in stage I-III adju- vant setting, as well as the combination of anti-CTLA4 and anti- PD-1 in stage I-III neoadjuvant setting, are ongoing. A consolida- tion trial using an anti-PD-L1 drug in consolidation after CRT will deliver results very soon (NCT NCT02125461).

Recommendations:
•	For curative-intent management, patients should be able to undergo platinum-based ChT (preferably cisplatin) [I, A].
•	(Neo)adjuvant anti PD(L)-1 checkpoint inhibitors are cur- rently being evaluated in addition to current standard of care. Checkpoints are also being evaluated after CRT as consolida- tion therapy.

Unresectable LA-NSCLC
Unresectable in this situation refers to the situation that—even after induction therapy—a complete resection (R0) would not be possible, based on evaluation within a multidisciplinary team, including an experienced thoracic surgeon.
Sequential CRT (induction ChT followed by RT), usually given at a dose of 60–66 Gy in 30–33 fractions over 6–7 weeks, was com- pared to concurrent CRT at comparable doses in several phase III trials and in a meta-analysis [120].
Concurrent CRT is considered the preferred treatment for pa- tients who are fit, as it leads to higher 5-year survival rates, albeit at the cost of a higher rate of reversible oesophagitis. In recent phase III trials delivering concurrent CRT to doses between 60 and 66 Gy, the incidence of grade 3 or higher oesophagitis ranged from 7% to 21%, with corresponding rates of grade 3 or higher radiation pneu- monitis ranging from 2.5% to 7% [51, 118]. Another area of con- cern is the early mortality rate of 10% following concurrent CRT. Tumour volume and pulmonary function were found to be risk fac- tors associated with mortality in the first 180-day post-treatment in a multi-institutional analysis of 1245 patients [121]. The use of radi- ation doses in excess of 66 Gy is not recommended outside trials, as delivery of 74 Gy with concurrent CRT led to a poorer survival [51]. For elderly and/or less fit patients with clinically relevant comorbidities, the sequential approach is a reasonable choice [50]. An individual patient data meta-analysis of trials conducted prior to 2006 found that accelerated RT schedules which are de- livered in a shorter overall treatment time led to an absolute bene- fit of 2.5% in 5-year OS [89]. Based on this, accelerated RT schedules delivering once-daily fractions of 2.6–3 Gy, to a total dose of up to 60–66 Gy, are recommended in patients who receive
either sequential CRT or RT alone for stage III NSCLC.

Recommendations:
•	Concurrent CRT is the treatment of choice in patients eval- uated as unresectable in stage IIIA and IIIB [I, A]. If concur- rent CRT is not possible—for any reason—sequential ChT followed by deﬁnitive RT represents a valid and effective al- ternative [I, A].
•	There is no role for prophylactic cranial irradiation in stage III NSCLC [II, A].
•	In the absence of contraindications, the optimal ChT to be combined with radiation in stage III NSCLC should be based
 
on cisplatin. There are no ﬁrm conclusions supporting single- agent carboplatin as a radiation sensitiser [I, A].
•	Most comparative studies of concurrent CRT versus sequen- tial administration were using cisplatin etoposide or cis- platin vinca alkaloid (typically: cisplatin vinorelbine), or cisplatin     pemetrexed if non-squamous histology. There are no comparative phase III trials using the paclitaxel/carbopla- tin regimen. When delivered perioperatively cisplatin-based combinations are considered the treatment of choice, in the absence of contraindications [I, A].
•	In the stage III disease CRT strategy, two to four cycles of concomitant ChT should be delivered [I, A]. There is no evi- dence for further induction or consolidation ChT. In the perioperative setting, three to four cycles of cisplatin-based ChT are recommended [I, A], aiming at a total cumulative dose of at least 300 mg/m2 of cisplatin [II, B].
•	60–66 Gy in 30–33 daily fractions is recommended for con- current CRT [I, A]. Maximum overall treatment time should not exceed 7 weeks [III, B]. ‘Biological intensiﬁcation’, such as treatment acceleration, is not standard practice in concur- rent CRT schedules [III, B].
•	In sequential approaches, RT delivered in a short overall treatment time is recommended [I, A].


 
Although proven to be beneficial in stage IV patients with driving mutations, such as in EGFR or translocation of anaplastic lym- phoma kinase (ALK), the role of targeted agents in stage I, II and III has not been evaluated properly. From the meta-analysis [77], no conclusion can be drawn for adjuvant use of targeted therapy in EGFR mutated stage I-III NSCLC. The only study in which more staging details are given included only 36 patients with stage III; however, details on outcome of those patients were not given [122].

Recommendations:
•	There is currently no role for targeted agents in stage III NSCLC outside clinical trials [I, A].
•	Immunotherapy is being studied in early NSCLC as (neo)ad- juvant therapy and as consolidation after CRT; data should be awaited before any clinical use [I, A].


Follow-up, long-term implications and	
survivorship	
NSCLC patients treated with radical intent are at risk of develop- ing new cancer related problems, with potentially considerable consequences and different dynamics over time:
•	treatment-related complications, treatment of existing comorbidities;
•	detection of treatable relapse;
•	detection of second primaries.
In the early phase after lung cancer resection, readmission for complications is not rare; 12.8% of patients listed in a large Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) programme database were readmitted within 30 days after discharge shortly
 
Table 4. Summary of recommendations
Incidence/epidemiology
●	Screening with LDCT reduces lung cancer-related mortality [I, A]. It is not yet ready for large-scale implementation, mainly because the lung cancer mor- tality reduction rate lacks deﬁnite proof of a second study result, and partly because of remaining questions regarding deﬁnition of the at-risk population, timing, interval and method of CT (especially 2D versus 3D evaluation), how to handle (false-) positive ﬁndings and especially cost-effectiveness, notably in relation to smoking cessation [I, A].
●	LDCT screening can be carried out outside a clinical trial provided it is offered within a dedicated programme with quality control, in a centre with ex- perience in CT screening, a large volume of thoracic oncology activity and multidisciplinary management of suspicious ﬁndings [I, B]. Candidates are cur- rent or former heavy smokers (≥ 30 pack-years or ≤ 15 years since smoking cessation) aged 55–74 years, who are well informed about potential beneﬁts and risks. Individuals offered LDCT screening should be referred to a smoking cessation programme.
●	LDCT screening should not be offered on an ad hoc individual basis, but patients requesting screening should be referred to a dedicated programme, as recommended above [V, B].
●	Other screening methods, such as chest X-ray, sputum analysis or biomarkers are not recommended for clinical use [I, C].
Diagnosis
●	In patients with clinical stages I–III lesions, a pretreatment pathological diagnosis is recommended prior to any curative treatment.
●	Bronchoscopy is the recommended test to obtain a pathological diagnosis of centrally located tumours in stages I–III with biopsy of any visible lesion [III, A].
●	The pathological classiﬁcation NOS should be used only in cases where it is impossible to obtain enough tissue for further classiﬁcation, or when steps
to further classify the tumour are inconclusive [V, A].
●	An exception to the requirement for a pretreatment diagnosis can be made if an experienced multidisciplinary group decides that the risks of obtaining pathology may be unacceptable in a patient in whom the likelihood of malignancy is high based on clinical and imaging ﬁndings [III, B].
●	A pretreatment pathological diagnosis is strongly recommended for all patients before SABR, unless a multidisciplinary tumour board is of the opinion that the risk-beneﬁt ratio of the procedure is unacceptable. In such a situation, the predicted likelihood of malignancy should preferably be at least 85%, based upon accepted criteria [III, B] [25].
●	The descriptive element of the recent WHO classiﬁcation of adenocarcinoma subtypes should be used to describe bronchoscopic and CT-guided biop-
sies whenever possible [III, A].
●	The revised adenocarcinoma classiﬁcation may identify patient subtypes for whom an anatomical sublobar resection, rather than lobectomy, would be sufﬁcient [III, A].
●	FDG-PET may contribute for the selection of patients for anatomical sublobar resections as low SUVmax values of peripheral tumours indicate lack of me- diastinal metastases [III, A]. This diagnosis may be made intra-operatively by video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy and frozen section analysis.
●	In isolated cases a diagnostic anatomical sublobar resection may be acceptable. Solitary pulmonary nodule
●	The diagnostic approach to non-calciﬁed pulmonary nodules should be based on existing standard guidelines [III, A], although new evidence on nodule management is emerging.
●	Likelihood of malignancy based upon risk calculation methods used in CT screening studies should be used only to guide the clinical assessment of pul- monary nodules detected in the wider population [V, C].
Staging and risk assessment
●	In non-metastatic NSCLC, detailed locoregional staging according to the 8th TNM staging system and the cardiopulmonary ﬁtness of the patient deter- mine the choice of treatment [III, A].
Locoregional staging
●	For part-solid tumours, the size of the invasive component should be used to assign the T category for clinical staging [III, A]
●	Subsolid lesions need dedicated radiological expertise for evaluating the lung lesion composition [V, A].
●	If two lung lesions fulﬁl the criteria for two primaries these should be evaluated and treated accordingly [III, A].
●	For patients with abnormal mediastinal and/or hilar lymph nodes at CT and/or PET imaging, endosonography is recommended over surgical staging [I, A].
●	The preferred ﬁrst technique for pathological conﬁrmation of suspect nodes is needle aspiration under EBUS and/or EUS guidance [I, A].
●	If EBUS and/or EUS does not reveal nodal involvement in a situation of high clinical suspicion, mediastinoscopy is indicated [I, A].
●	Mediastinoscopy is the test with the highest negative predictive value to rule out mediastinal lymph node disease [I, A].
●	Screening for brain metastases by MRI might be useful in patients considered for curative therapy [III, B].
Pretreatment risk assessment
●	In non-metastatic NSCLC, the cardiopulmonary ﬁtness of the patient will determine the choice of treatment [III, A].
●	The risk of postoperative morbidity and mortality can be estimated using risk-speciﬁc models, although none have been validated in a cancer population [III, B].
●	Before considering surgical resection, precise assessment of cardiac and pulmonary function is necessary to estimate risk of operative morbidity [III, A].
●	For cardiac assessment, use of recalibrated RCRI is recommended [III, A].
●	Formal lung function testing should be undertaken to estimate postoperative lung function. For patients with FEV1 and DLCO values > 80% of their pre-
dicted pulmonary function tests and no other major comorbidities, no further investigations are advised before surgical resection [III, A]. For others, exer- cise testing and split lung function are recommended. In these patients, VO2max can be used to measure exercise capacity and predict postoperative complications [III, A].
●	Comorbidities should be evaluated and optimised before surgery [III, A].
●	In patients with limited pulmonary function due to emphysema, a lung volume reduction effect may be observed by resection of the lung cancer within
emphysematous lung tissue [III, B].
Continued
 
Table 4. Continued
Treatment of early stages (stages I and II)
Surgery
●	Surgery should be offered to all patients with stage I and II NSCLC as the preferred treatment to all who are willing to accept procedure-related risks [III, A].
●	For patients with a non-centrally located resectable tumour and absence of nodal metastasis on both CT and PET images, surgical resection is recom-
mended [I, A].
●	Anatomical resection is preferred over wedge resection [I, A].
●	Anatomical segmentectomy is generally considered acceptable for pure GGO lesions or adenocarcinomas in situ or with minimal invasion [III, B].
●	Lobectomy is still considered the standard surgical treatment of tumours ≥ 2 cm in size that have a solid appearance on CT [II, B].
●	Lymph node dissection should conform to IASLC speciﬁcations for staging [III, A].
●	Either open thoracotomy or VATS access can be carried out as appropriate to the expertise of the surgeon [III, A].
●	VATS should be the approach of choice in stage I tumours [V, C].
●	For patients with multifocal lung cancer, complete resection is recommended whenever possible. All patients with multifocal lung cancer should be dis-
cussed in a multidisciplinary tumour board [III, B].
Systemic therapy
●	Adjuvant ChT should be offered to patients with resected stage II and III NSCLC [I, A] and can be considered in patients with resected stage IB disease and a primary tumour > 4 cm [II, B]. Pre-existing comorbidity, time from surgery and postoperative recovery need to be taken into account in this deci- sion taken in a multidisciplinary tumour board [V, A].
●	For adjuvant ChT, a two-drug combination with cisplatin is preferable [I, A]. In randomised studies, the attempted cumulative cisplatin dose was up to 300 mg/m2, delivered in three to four cycles. The most frequently studied regimen is cisplatin–vinorelbine.
●	At the present time, the choice of adjuvant therapy should not be guided by molecular analyses, e.g. ERCC1 mutation testing [IV, B].
●	In the current state of knowledge, targeted agents should not be used in the adjuvant setting [II, A].
●	In view of the equivalence of neoadjuvant and adjuvant ChT for OS, the consistent results and broad evidence base support adjuvant ChT as the timing of choice [II, C].
●	(Neo)adjuvant anti-PD(L)-1 checkpoint inhibitors are currently being evaluated in addition to current standard of care.
Primary radiotherapy
●	The non-surgical treatment of choice for stage I NSCLC is SABR. The dose should be to a biologically equivalent tumour dose of ≥ 100 Gy, prescribed to the encompassing isodose [III, A].
●	SABR for early-stage peripheral lung tumours is associated with low toxicity in patients with COPD and the elderly [III, A].
●	Salvage surgery, if feasible, may be offered to patients having complications post-SABR [V, B].
●	Salvage surgery, if feasible, may be offered, using the same indications as for primary surgery in progressive disease after SABR, but surgery may be more
difﬁcult with higher operative risk [V, B].
●	For medically inoperable patients with tumours with a size > 5 cm and/or moderately central location, radical RT using more conventional or accelerated schedules is recommended [III, A].
Radiofrequency ablation
●	Stage I NSCLC patients with strong contraindications for surgery and/or SABR may be treated with RFA [V, C]. Postoperative radiotherapy
●	PORT in completely resected early-stage NSCLC is not recommended [I, A].
●	In case of R1 resection (positive resection margin, chest wall), PORT should be considered [IV, B].
●	Even if such patients were not included in RCTs, adjuvant ChT should be considered in patients with R1 resection of stage IB disease and a primary tu- mour > 4 cm, stage II and III [V, A].
●	In case both ChT and RT are administered post-surgery, RT should be administered after ChT [V, C].
Treatment of locally advanced stage (stage III)
●	All patients planned for deﬁnitive stage III NSCLC treatment should undergo a diagnostic contrast-enhanced CT scan of the chest and upper abdomen followed by a PET or a combined PET-CT with a CT technique with adequately high resolution for initial staging purposes [I, A] in order to rule out detect- able extrathoracic, extracranial metastasis, and to assess potential mediastinal lymph node involvement, ideally within 4 weeks before the start of treat- ment [III, B]. Single PET-positive distant lesions need pathological conﬁrmation [V, B].
●	For patients with operable N2 disease, pathological staging of the mediastinum is advised [III, C].
●	All patients planned for curative stage III NSCLC treatment should receive brain imaging for initial staging [III, B]. Contrast-enhanced brain MRI is the preferred
method for staging of the brain in stage III disease [III, A]. If it is not possible to perform MRI, dedicated contrast-enhanced brain CT scan is advised [III, B].
Resectable LA-NSCLC
●	If, despite adequate mediastinal staging procedures, N2 disease is only documented intra-operatively, surgery should be followed by adjuvant ChT [I, A]. In case of complete resection, addition of PORT is not routinely recommended, but may be an option following individual risk assessment [V, C].
●	If single station N2 disease can be demonstrated by preoperative pathological nodal analysis, resection followed by adjuvant ChT, induction ChT fol- lowed by surgery or induction CRT followed by surgery are options. If induction ChT alone is given preoperatively, PORT is not standard treatment, but may be an option based on critical evaluation of locoregional relapse risks [IV, C].
●	In multistation N2 or N3, concurrent deﬁnitive CRT is preferred [I, A]. An experienced multidisciplinary team is of paramount importance in any complex
multimodality treatment strategy decision, including the role of surgery in these cases [IV, C].
●	In potentially resectable superior sulcus tumours, concurrent CRT induction followed by deﬁnitive surgery is the treatment of choice [III, A]. The same strategy may be applied for potentially resectable T3 or T4 central tumours in highly selected cases and experienced centres [III, B]. In both situations, surgery should be carried out within 4 weeks after the end of RT [III, B].
Continued
 
Table 4. Continued
Systemic therapy
●	For curative-intent management, patients should be able to undergo platinum-based ChT (preferably cisplatin) [I, A].
●	(Neo)adjuvant anti PD(L)-1 checkpoint inhibitors are currently being evaluated in addition to current standard of care.
●	Checkpoints are also being evaluated after CRT as consolidation therapy.
Unresectable LA-NSCLC
●	Concurrent CRT is the treatment of choice in patients evaluated as unresectable in stage IIIA and IIIB [I, A]. If concurrent CRT is not possible—for any reason—sequential ChT followed by deﬁnitive RT represents a valid and effective alternative [I, A].
●	There is no role for prophylactic cranial irradiation in stage III NSCLC [II, A].
●	In the absence of contraindications, the optimal ChT to be combined with radiation in stage III NSCLC should be based on cisplatin. There are no ﬁrm
conclusions supporting single-agent carboplatin as a radiation sensitiser [I, A].
●	Most comparative studies of concurrent CRT versus sequential administration were using cisplatin þ etoposide or cisplatin þ vinca alkaloid (typically: cis- platin þ vinorelbine), or cisplatin þ pemetrexed if non-squamous histology. There are no comparative phase III trials using the paclitaxel/carboplatin regi- men. When delivered perioperatively cisplatin-based combinations are considered the treatment of choice, in the absence of contraindications [I, A].
●	In the stage III disease CRT strategy, two to four cycles of concomitant ChT should be delivered [I, A]. There is no evidence for further induction or con- solidation ChT. In the perioperative setting, three to four cycles of cisplatin-based ChT are recommended [I, A], aiming at a total cumulative dose of at least 300 mg/m2 of cisplatin [II, B].
●	60–66 Gy in 30–33 daily fractions is recommended for concurrent CRT [I, A]. Maximum overall treatment time should not exceed 7 weeks [III, B].
‘Biological intensiﬁcation’, such as treatment acceleration, is not standard practice in concurrent CRT schedules [III, B].
●	In sequential approaches, RT delivered in a short overall treatment time is recommended [I, A].
Personalised medicine
●	There is currently no role for targeted agents in stage III NSCLC outside clinical trials [I, A].
●	Immunotherapy is being studied in early NSCLC as (neo)adjuvant therapy and as consolidation after CRT; data should be awaited before any clinical use [I, A].
Follow-up, long-term implications and survivorship
●	NSCLC patients treated with radical intent should be followed for treatment-related complications, detection of treatable relapse or occurrence of se- cond primary lung cancer [III, A].
●	Surveillance every 6 months for 2 years with a visit including history, physical examination and—preferably contrast-enhanced—volume chest CT scan
at least at 12 and 24 months is recommended, and thereafter an annual visit including history, physical examination and chest CT scan in order to detect second primary tumours [III, B].
●	For individual patients, follow-up with six-monthly CT scans for 3 years is recommended for patients who are suitable for salvage treatment (e.g. sur-
gery, local ablative therapy) [III, B]. The frequency of the follow-up visits can be tailored to the individual patient for those not suitable for salvage treat- ment [V, B].
●	The selective use of FDG–PET is recommended when recurrence after SABR is suspected based on serial spiral chest CT [III, B].
●	Due to a high number of false-positive ﬁndings on PET, patients suitable for salvage therapy should undergo a biopsy, whenever possible [III, B].
●	NSCLC patients should be offered smoking cessation, as this leads to superior treatment outcomes. Combining behaviour techniques with pharmaco-
therapy is the preferred approach [I, A].

2D, 2 dimensional; 3D, 3 dimensional; ChT, chemotherapy; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CRT, chemoradiotherapy; CT, computed tomography; DLCO, diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide; EBUS, endobronchial ultrasound; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; FDG–PET, ﬂuorodeoxyglucose posi- tron emission tomography; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; GGO, ground glass opacity; IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer; LA-NSCLC, locally advanced NSCLC; LDCT, low-dose CT; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NSCLC, non-small-cell lung cancer; NOS, not otherwise speciﬁed; OS, overall survival; PET, positron emission tomography; PORT, postoperative radiotherapy; RCRI, revised cardiac risk index; RCT, randomised controlled trial; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; RT, radiotherapy; SABR, stereotactic ablative radiotherapy; SUVmax, maximum standardised uptake value; TNM, tumour, node and metastasis; VATS, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery; VO2max, maximal oxygen consumption; WHO, World Health Organization.


 
after the resection; reasons were respiratory insufficiency, pneu- monia, pneumothorax and cardiac complications. Patient factors associated with readmission were resection type, age, prior induc- tion CRT and preoperative comorbidities, including congestive heart failure and COPD. The 90-day mortality in those readmitted at 30 days is 6-fold that of those not readmitted. This emphasises the need for adequate care and more intense early follow-up in pa- tients at risk of developing postoperative problems [123]. Overall, the 90-day mortality is nearly double the 30-day mortality, with a considerable difference between low and high-volume hospitals [124]. Overall, these patients have a significant excess conditional mortality with an—increasing over time—relative contribution of cardiovascular and respiratory co-morbidity [125].
 
In a large group of resected patients, standardised follow-up re- vealed that during the first 4 years after surgery, the risk of recur- rence ranged from 6% to 10% per person per year, but decreased thereafter to 2% [126]. Within this period a pattern can be recog- nised, during the first and second year recurrence is mainly local and rare thereafter, whereas at the end of the second year until the end of the fourth year, recurrence is dominated by distant meta- stases decreasing over time [127]. After 5 years, these are virtually absent. The risk of developing a second primary lung cancer ex- hibits a more uniform pattern over time, ranging from 1% to 6% per person per year and did not diminish over time [126, 128]. This is not restricted to cancers developing in smokers but was observed at a comparable magnitude in non-smokers [129].
 

 

 

Surveillance after treatment with curative intent is only useful if detection of a recurrence, locally or distant, or detection of a metachronous primary will result in potentially life-prolonging or preferable curative therapy. Curative therapy after a local re- currence is often not possible, resulting only in 5-year survival rates of 15% [130, 131].
For second primaries, the outcome is better with 5-year sur- vival rates ranging from 25% to 60% [132, 133].
This illustrates that detection of local recurrence or a meta- chronous primary may lead to therapy resulting in long-term dis- ease-free survival. Therefore, regular screening for both is likely to be worthwhile.
There are no prospective trials evaluating what will be the most optimal follow-up after surgery. As most local relapses will be seen during the first two years after treatment, a follow-up visit every 6 months is recommended during that period, and annually thereafter. A new finding detected through history, physical examination and/or imaging (preferably CT) usually needs to be discussed in an experienced multidisciplinary team taking into account that a new finding could be a treatment complication, a metastasis or a new primary.
For patients initially treated with SABR, the late local recur- rences can be observed for up to 5 years post-treatment, and the incidence of second primary lung tumours appears to be similar to that post-surgery [81, 134]. As it may be sometimes difficult to distinguish post-SABR recurrences from focal fibrosis, high- risk radiological features have been identified [135] and the use of such a scheme has recently been independently validated [136].
Patients who have undergone ChT and RT for stage III NSCLC, are at high risk of developing progressive disease, either locally or at metastatic sites. Establishing locoregional disease progression is often a diagnostic challenge, but this is important in patients who may be fit for salvage treatments [98–105].
Smoking cessation is crucial in all lung cancer patients treated with curative intent, and patients should be offered support to achieve this goal.
 

Recommendations:
•	NSCLC patients treated with radical intent should be followed for treatment-related complications, detection of treatable re- lapse or occurrence of second primary lung cancer [III, A].
•	Surveillance every 6 months for 2 years with a visit including history, physical examination and—preferably contrast- enhanced—volume chest CT scan  at  least  at  12  and 24 months is recommended, and thereafter an annual visit including history, physical examination and chest CT scan in order to detect second primary tumours [III, B].
•	For individual patients, follow-up with six-monthly CT scans for 3 years is recommended for patients who are suitable for salvage treatment (e.g. surgery, local ablative therapy) [III, B]. The frequency of the follow-up visits can be tailored to the indi- vidual patient for those not suitable for salvage treatment [V, B].
•	The selective use of FDG–PET is recommended when recur- rence after SABR is suspected based on serial spiral chest CT scan [III, B].
•	Due to a high number of false-positive ﬁndings on PET, pa- tients suitable for salvage therapy should undergo a biopsy, whenever possible [III, B].
•	NSCLC patients should be offered smoking cessation, as this leads to superior treatment outcomes. Combining behaviour techniques with pharmacotherapy is the preferred approach [I, A].


 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development http://www.esmo.org/ Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The relevant litera- ture has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of rec- ommendations is shown in Table 4. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 5. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty.
 
This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.


 
PEP has reported advisory boards for Bristol-Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, AstraZeneca, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Merck Sharp & Dohme and Roche; received hon- oraria from Roche and travel grants from Merck Sharp & Dohme, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer and Celgene; KMK has reported lec- ture honoraria and/or consultancy fees from AstraZeneca, Bristol- Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Merck KGaA, Merck Sharpe & Dohme, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche and Roche Diagnostics; SS has reported advisory boards for Lilly Oncology and research sponsored by Varian Medical Systems; JV has reported advisory boards, consulting and honoraria from Merck Sharp & Dohme, Boehringer, Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca and Novartis; MO, DW, CE and SP have reported no conflicts of interest.

 
1.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Lung Cancer. https://www. cdc.gov/cancer/lung/basic_info/ (18 May 2017, date last accessed).
2.	Sun S, Schiller JH, Gazdar AF. Lung cancer in never smokers—a differ- ent disease. Nat Rev Cancer 2007; 7: 778–790.
3.	Aberle DR, Adams AM, Berg CD et al. Reduced lung-cancer mortality with low-dose computed tomographic screening. N Engl J Med 2011; 365: 395–409.
4.	Veronesi G, Maisonneuve P, Bellomi M et al. Estimating overdiagnosis in low-dose computed tomography screening for lung cancer: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2012; 157: 776–784.
5.	Patz EF Jr, Pinsky P, Gatsonis C et al. Overdiagnosis in low-dose com- puted tomography screening for lung cancer. JAMA Intern Med 2014; 174: 269–274.
6.	Travis WD, Brambilla E, Noguchi M et al. International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society international multidisciplinary classification of lung adenocarcinoma. J Thorac Oncol 2011; 6: 244–285.
7.	Franklin WA, Merrick DT, Achcar RD, Aberle DR. Reclassification of lung cancers detected by CT imaging in the American College of Radiology Imaging Network National Lung Screening Trial. J Thor Oncol 2015; 10 (9, Suppl 2): S220. oral24.05.
8.	Wiener RS, Gould MK, Arenberg DA et al. An official American Thoracic Society/American College of Chest Physicians policy statement: imple- mentation of low-dose computed tomography lung cancer screening pro- grams in clinical practice. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015; 192: 881–891.
9.	Begnaud A, Hall T, Allen T. Lung cancer screening with low-dose CT: implementation amid changing public policy at one health care system. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book 2016; 35: e468–e475.
10.	van Iersel CA, de Koning HJ, Draisma G et al. Risk-based selection from the general population in a screening trial: selection criteria, recruit- ment and power for the Dutch-Belgian randomised lung cancer multi- slice CT screening trial (NELSON). Int J Cancer 2007; 120: 868–874.
11.	Horeweg N, van Rosmalen J, Heuvelmans MA et al. Lung cancer prob- ability in patients with CT-detected pulmonary nodules: a prespecified analysis of data from the NELSON trial of low-dose CT screening. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 1332–1341.
12.	Walter JE, Heuvelmans MA, de Jong PA et al. Occurrence and lung can- cer probability of new solid nodules at incidence screening with low- dose CT: analysis of data from the randomised, controlled NELSON trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17: 907–916.
13.	Yousaf-Khan U, van der Aalst C, de Joing PA et al. Risk stratification based on screening history: the NELSON lung cancer screening study. Thorax 2017; 72: 48–56.
 
14.	Novello S, Barlesi F, Califano R et al. Metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2016; 27 (Suppl 5): v1–v27.
15.	Navani N, Brown JN, Nankivell M et al. Suitability of endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration specimens for sub- typing and genotyping of non-small cell lung cancer. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 185: 1316–1322.
16.	Travis WD, Brambilla E, Nicholson AG et al. The 2015 World Health Organization Classification of Lung Tumours: impact of genetic, clin- ical and radiologic advances since the 2004 classification. J Thor Oncol 2015; 10: 1243–1260.
17.	Warth A, Muley T, Meister M et al. The novel histologic International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/ European Respiratory Society classification system of lung adenocarcin- oma is a stage-independent predictor of survival. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 1438–1446.
18.	Hung JJ, Yeh YC, Jeng WJ et al. Predictive value of the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/ European Respiratory Society classification of lung adenocarcinoma in tumor recurrence and patient survival. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 2357–2364.
19.	Tsao MS, Marguet S, Le Teuff G et al. Subtype classification of lung adenocarcinoma predicts benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy in pa- tients undergoing complete resection. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 3439–3446.
20.	Yu Y, Jian H, Shen L et al. Lymph node involvement influenced by lung adenocarcinoma subtypes in tumour size ≤ 3 cm disease: a study of 2268 cases. Eur J Surg Oncol 2016; 42: 1714–1719.
21.	Liu S, Wang R, Zhang Y et al. Precise diagnosis of intraoperative frozen section is an effective method to guide resection strategy for peripheral small-sized lung adenocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 307–313.
22.	Walts AE, Marchevsky AM. Root cause analysis of problems in the fro- zen section diagnosis of in situ, minimally invasive, and invasive adeno- carcinoma of the lung. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2012; 136: 1515–1521.
23.	Yeh YC, Nitadori J, Kadota K et al. Using frozen section to identify histological patterns in stage I lung adenocarcinoma of ≤ 3 cm: accur- acy and interobserver agreement. Histopathology 2015; 66: 922–938.
24.	Donington JS. An additional step toward personalization of surgical care for early-stage non–small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 295–296.
25.	Nakamura H, Saji H, Marushima H et al. Standardized uptake values in the primary lesions of non-small-cell lung cancer in FDG-PET/CT can predict regional lymph node metastases. Ann Surg Oncol 2015; 22: S1388–S1393.
26.	Matsuzawa R, Kirita K, Kuwata T et al. Factors influencing the concord- ance of histological subtype diagnosis from biopsy and resected speci- mens of lung adenocarcinoma. Lung Cancer 2016; 94: 1–6.
27.	Callister ME, Baldwin DR, Akram AR et al. British Thoracic Society Guidelines for the investigation and management of pulmonary nod- ules. Thorax 2015; 70: ii1–ii54.
28.	MacMahon H, Naidich P, Goo JM et al. Guidelines for management of incidental pulmonary nodules detected on CT images: from the Fleischner Society 2017. Radiology 2017; 284: 228–243.
29.	Bai C, Choi CM, Chu CM et al. Evaluation of pulmonary nodules: clin- ical practice consensus guidelines for Asia. Chest 2016; 150: 877–893.
30.	Brierley JD, Gospodarowicz MK and Wittekind C. (eds). TNM Classification of Malignant Tumours, 8th edition. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2016.
31.	Rami-Porta R, Bolejack V, Crowley J et al. The IASLC lung cancer stag- ing project: proposals for the revisions of the T descriptors in the forth- coming eighth edition of the TNM classification for lung cancer. J Thor Oncol 2015; 10: 990–1003.
32.	Travis WD, Asamura H, Bankier AA et al. The IASLC lung cancer stag- ing project: proposals for coding T categories for subsolid nodules and assessment of tumor size in part-solid tumors in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification of lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2016; 11: 1204–1223.
33.	Detterbeck FC, Bolejack V, Arenberg DA et al. The IASLC lung cancer stag- ing project: background data and proposals for the classification of lung cancer with separate tumor nodules in the forthcoming edition of the TNM classification for lung cancer. J Thor Oncol 2016; 11: 681–692.
 
34.	Detterbeck FC, Franklin WA, Nicholson AG et al. The IASLC lung can- cer staging project: background data and proposed criteria to distin- guish separate primary lung cancers from metastatic foci in patients with two lung tumors in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification for lung cancer. J Thor Oncol 2016; 11: 651–665.
35.	Detterbeck FC, Nicholson AG, Franklin WA et al. The IASLC lung can- cer staging project: summary of proposals for revisions of the classifica- tion of lung cancers with multiple pulmonary sites of involvement in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification. J Thor Oncol 2016; 11: 639–650.
36.	Detterbeck FC, Marom EM, Arenberg DA et al. The IASLC lung cancer staging project: background data and proposals for the application of TNM staging rules to lung cancer presenting as multiple nodules with ground glass or lepidic features or a pneumonic type of involvement in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification for lung can- cer. J Thor Oncol 2016; 11: 666–680.
37.	Vilmann P, Clementsen PF, Colella S et al. Combined endobronchial and esophageal endosonography for the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) guideline, in co- operation with the European Respiratory Society (ERS) and the European Society of Thoracic Surgeons (ESTS). Endoscopy 2015; 47: 545–559.
38.	Asamura H, Chansky C, Crowley J et al. The IASLC lung cancer staging project: proposals for the revisions of the N descriptors in the forthcom- ing 8th edition of the TNM classification for lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2015; 10: 1675–1684.
39.	Ettinger DS, Wood DE, Aisner DL et al. NCCN clinical practice guide- lines in oncology: non–small cell lung cancer version 5.2017. March 16, 2017. https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nscl.pdf. (1 May 2017, date last accessed).
40.	Baldwin DR, White B, Schmidt-Hansen M et al. Diagnosis and treat- ment of lung cancer: summary of updated NICE guidance. BMJ 2011; 342: d2110.
41.	Lim E, Baldwin D, Beckles M et al. Guidelines on the radical manage- ment of patients with lung cancer. Thorax 2010; 65 (Suppl 3): iii1–iii27.
42.	Silvestri GA, Gonzalez AV, Jantz MA et al. Methods for staging non- small cell lung cancer diagnosis and management of lung cancer, 3rd ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 2013; 143(5 Suppl): e211S–e250S.
43.	Vernon J, Andruszkiewicz N, Schneider L et al. Comprehensive clinical staging for resectable lung cancer: clinicopathological correlations and the role of brain MRI. J Thor Oncol 2016; 11: 1970–1975.
44.	Brunelli A, Postmus PE, Preoperative functional evaluation of the surgi- cal candidate. In HI Pass, D Ball, GV Scagliotti (eds), The IASLC Approach to Thoracic Oncology. Aurora, CO: IASLC 2014; 373–383.
45.	Yacoub WN, Meyers BF. Surgical resection in combination with lung volume reduction surgery for stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2010; 22: 38–43.
46.	Falcoz PE, Conti M, Brouchet L et al. The Thoracic Surgery Scoring System (Thoracoscore): risk model for in-hospital death in 15,183 patients requiring thoracic surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2007; 133: 325–332.
47.	Brunelli A, Varela G, Salati M et al. Recalibration of the revised cardiac risk index in lung resection candidates. Ann Thorac Surg 2010; 90: 199–203.
48.	Brunelli A, Cassivi SD, Fibla J et al. External validation of the recali- brated thoracic revised cardiac risk index for predicting the risk of major cardiac complications after lung resection. Ann Thorac Surg 2011; 92: 445–448.
49.	Lau KK, Rathinam S, Waller DA, Peake MD. The effects of increased provision of thoracic surgical specialists on the variation in lung cancer resection rate in England. J Thor Oncol 2013; 8: 68–72.
50.	Brunelli A, Charloux A, Bolliger CT et al. ERS/ESTS clinical guidelines on fitness for radical therapy in lung cancer patients (surgery and chemo-radiotherapy). Eur Respir J 2009; 34: 17–41.
51.	Bradley JD, Paulus R, Komaki R et al. Standard-dose versus high-dose conformal radiotherapy with concurrent and consolidation carboplatin plus paclitaxel with or without cetuximab for patients with stage IIIA or IIIB non-small-cell lung cancer (RTOG 0617): a randomised, two-by- two factorial phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 187–199.
 
52.	Hong JC, Salama JK. Dose escalation for unresectable locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer: end of the line?. Transl Lung Cancer Res 2016; 5: 126–133.
53.	Tucker SL, Liu A, Gomez D et al. Impact of heart and lung dose on early survival in patients with non-small cell lung cancer treated with chemo- radiation. Radiother Oncol 2016; 119: 495–500.
54.	Harada H, Yamashita Y, Misumi K et al. Multidisciplinary team-based approach for comprehensive preoperative pulmonary rehabilitation including intensive nutritional support for lung cancer patients. PLoS One 2013; 8: e59566.
55.	Rosen JE, Keshava HB, Yao X et al. The natural history of operable non- small cell lung cancer in the National Cancer Database. Ann Thorac Surg 2016; 101: 1850–1855.
56.	Ginsberg RJ, Rubinstein LV. Randomized trial of lobectomy versus lim- ited resection for T1N0 non-small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer Study Group. Ann Thorac Surg 1995; 60: 615–622.
57.	Veluswamy RR, Ezer N, Mhango G et al. Limited resection versus lobec- tomy for older patients with early stage lung cancer: impact of histology. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 3447–3453.
58.	Koike T, Kitahara A, Sato S et al. Lobectomy versus segmentectomy in radiologically pure solid small-sized non-small cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 2016; 101: 1354–1360.
59.	Blasberg JD, Pass HI, Donington JS. Sublobar resection: a movement from the Lung Cancer Study Group. J Thorac Oncol 2010; 5: 1583–1593.
60.	Nakamura K, Saji H, Nakajima R et al. A phase III randomized trial of lobectomy versus limited reection for for small-sized peripheral non- small cell lung cancer (JCOG0802/WJOG4607L). Jpn J Clin Oncol 2010; 40: 271–274.
61.	Petrella F, Spaggiari L. The smaller the better: a new concept in thoracic surgery? Lancet Oncol 2016; 17: 699–700.
62.	Zhang W, Wei Y, Jiang H et al. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery versus thoracotomy lymph node dissection in clinical stage I lung cancer: a meta- analysis and system review. Ann Thorac Surg 2016; 101: 2417–2424.
63.	Bendixen M, Jørgensen OD, Kronborg C et al. Postoperative pain and quality of life after lobectomy via video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery or anterolateral thoracotomy for early stage lung cancer: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17: 836–844.
64.	Rami-Porta R, Wittekind C, Goldstraw P, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) Staging Committee. Complete resection in lung cancer surgery: proposed definition. Lung Cancer 2005; 49: 25–33.
65.	Huang X, Wang J, Chen Q, Jiang J. Mediastinal lymph node dissection ver- sus mediastinal lymph node sampling for early stage non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2014; 9: e109979.
66.	Chang JY, Liu YH, Zhu Z et al. Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy: a po- tentially curable approach to early stage multiple primary lung cancer. Cancer 2013; 119: 3402–3410.
67.	Griffioen GH, Lagerwaard FJ, Haasbeek CJ et al. Treatment of multiple primary lung cancers using stereotactic radiotherapy, either with or without surgery. Radiother Oncol 2013; 107: 403–408.
68.	Artal  Corte´s  A,  Calera  Urquizu  L,  Hernando  Cubero  J.  Adjuvant chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer: state-of-the-art. Transl Lung Cancer Res 2015; 4: 191–197.
69.	NSCLC Meta-analyses Collaborative Group; Arriagada R, Auperin A, Burdett S et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy, with or without postoperative radiotherapy, in operable non-small-cell lung cancer: two meta- analyses of individual patient data. Lancet 2010; 375: 1267–1277.
70.	Wakelee HA, Dahlberg SE, Keller SM et al. E1505: adjuvant chemother- apy þ/- bevacizumab for early stage NSCLC—Outcomes based on chemotherapy subsets. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34 (Suppl); abstr 8507.
71.	Butts CA, Ding K, Seymour L et al. Randomized phase III trial of vinor- elbine plus cisplatin compared with observation in completely resected stage IB and II non-small-cell lung cancer: updated survival analysis of JBR-10. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 29–34.
72.	Salazar MC, Rosen JE, Wang Z et al. Association of delayed adjuvant chemotherapy with survival after lung cancer surgery. JAMA Oncol 2017; 3: 610–619.
 
73.	Strauss GM, Herndon JE 2nd, Maddaus MA et al. Adjuvant paclitaxel plus carboplatin compared with observation in stage IB non-small-cell lung cancer: CALGB 9633 with the Cancer and Leukemia Group B, Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, and North Central Cancer Treatment Group Study Groups. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 5043–5051.
74.	Lim E, Harris G, Patel A et al. Preoperative versus postoperative chemo- therapy in patients with resectable non-small cell lung cancer: system- atic review and indirect comparison meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Thorac Oncol 2009; 4: 1380–1388.
75.	NSCLC Meta-analysis Collaborative Group. Preoperative chemother- apy for non-small-cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta- analysis of individual participant data. Lancet 2014; 383: 1561–1571.
76.	Gilligan D, Nicolson M, Smith I et al. Preoperative chemotherapy in pa- tients with resectable non-small cell lung cancer: results of the MRC LU22/NVALT 2/EORTC 08012 multicentre randomised trial and up- date of systematic review. Lancet 2007; 369: 1929–1937.
77.	Huang O, Li J, Sun Y et al. Efficacy of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in the adjuvant treatment for operable non-small cell lung cancer by a meta-analysis. Chest 2016; 149: 1384–1392.
78.	Tada H, Takeda K, Nakagawa K et al. Vinorelbine plus cisplatin versus gefitinib in resected non-small cell lung cancer harboring activating EGFR mutation (WJOG6410L). J Clin Oncol 2012; 30 (Suppl); abstr TPS7110.
79.	National Cancer Institute, Lung Cancer. http://www.cancer.gov/types/ lung/research/alchemist (18 May 2017, date last accessed).
80.	Lindberg K, Nyman J, Riesenfeld K€allskog V et al. Long-term results of a prospective phase II trial of medically inoperable stage I NSCLC treated with SBRT – the Nordic experience. Acta Oncol 2015; 54: 1096–1104.
81.	Verstegen NE, Lagerwaard FJ, Hashemi SM et al. Patterns of disease re- currence after SABR for early stage non-small-cell lung cancer: optimiz- ing follow-up schedules for salvage therapy. J Thorac Oncol 2015; 10: 1195–1200.
82.	Louie AV, Palma DA, Dahele M et al. Management of early-stage non- small cell lung cancer using stereotactic ablative radiotherapy: contro- versies, insights, and changing horizons. Radiother Oncol 2015; 114: 138–147.
83.	Chen H, Louie AV, Boldt RG et al. Quality of life after stereotactic abla- tive radiotherapy for early-stage lung cancer: a systematic review. Clin Lung Cancer 2016; 17: e141–e149.
84.	Bahig H, Filion E, Vu T et al. Severe radiation pneumonitis after lung stereotactic ablative radiation therapy in patients with interstitial lung disease. Pract Radiat Oncol 2016; 6: 367–374.
85.	Chen H, Senan S, Nossent EJ et al. Treatment-related toxicity in pa- tients with early-stage non-small cell lung cancer and co-existing inter- stitial lung disease: a systematic review. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2017; 98: 245–246.
86.	Nambu A, Onishi H, Aoki S et al. Rib fracture after stereotactic radio- therapy for primary lung cancer: prevalence, degree of clinical symp- toms, and risk factors. BMC Cancer 2013; 13: 68.
87.	Timmerman RD, Herman J, Cho LC. Emergence of stereotactic body radiation therapy and its impact on current and future clinical practice. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 2847–2854.
88.	Haasbeek CJ, Palma D, Visser O et al. Early-stage lung cancer in elderly patients: a population-based study of changes in treatment patterns and survival in the Netherlands. Ann Oncol 2012; 23: 2743–2747.
89.	Mauguen  A,  le  Pe´choux  C,  Saunders  MI  et  al.  Hyperfractionated  or accelerated radiotherapy in lung cancer: an individual patient data meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 2788–2797.
90.	Cheung P, Faria S, Ahmed S et al. Phase II study of accelerated hypo- fractionated three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy for stage T1-3 N0 M0 non-small cell lung cancer. NCIC CTG BR.25. J Natl Cancer Inst 2014; 106: dju164.
91.	Onishi H, Shirato H, Nagata Y et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for operable stage I non-small-cell lung cancer: can SBRT be comparable to surgery?. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2011; 81: 1352–1358.
 
92.	Lagerwaard FJ, Verstegen NE, Haasbeek CJ et al. Outcomes of stereotactic ablative radiotherapy in patients with potentially operable stage I non- small cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2012; 83: 348–353.
93.	Siva S, Ball D. Curing operable stage I non-small cell lung cancer with stereotactic ablative body radiotherapy: the force awakens. Oncologist 2016; 21: 393–398.
94.	Chang JY, Senan S, Paul MA et al. Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy ver- sus lobectomy for operable stage I non-small-cell lung cancer: a pooled analysis of two randomised trials. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 630–637.
95.	Cherny NI, Sullivan R, Dafni U et al. A standardised, generic, validated approach to stratify the magnitude of clinical benefit that can be antici- pated from anti-cancer therapies: the European Society for Medical Oncology Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS). Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 1547–1573.
96.	Samson P, Waters EA, Meyers B, Politi MC. Shared decision making and effective risk communication in the high-risk patient with operable stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Ann Thorac Surg 2016; 101: 2049–2052.
97.	Hopmans W, Damman OC, Senan S et al. A patient perspective on shared decision making in stage I non-small cell lung cancer: a mixed methods study. BMC Cancer 2015; 15: 959.
98.	Chen F, Matsuo Y, Yoshizawa A et al. Salvage lung resection for non- small cell lung cancer after stereotactic body radiotherapy in initially operable patients. J Thorac Oncol 2010; 5: 1999–2002.
99.	Neri S, Takahashi Y, Terashi T et al. Surgical treatment of local recur- rence after stereotactic body radiotherapy for primary and metastatic lung cancers. J Thorac Oncol 2010; 5: 2003–2007.
100.	Allibhai Z, Cho BC, Taremi M et al. Surgical salvage following stereotactic body radiotherapy for early-stage NSCLC. Eur Respir J 2012; 39: 1039–1042.
101.	Hamamoto Y, Kataoka M, Yamashita M et al. Lung-cancer related chest events detected by periodical follow-up CT after stereotactic body radiotherapy for stage I primary lung cancer: retrospective analysis of incidence of lung-cancer related chest events and outcomes of salvage treatment. Jpn J Radiol 2012; 30: 671–675.
102.	Taira N, Kawabata T, Ichi T et al. Salvage operation for late recurrence after stereotactic body radiotherapy for lung cancer: two patients with no viable cancer cells. Ann Thorac Surg 2014; 97: 2167–2171.
103.	Hamaji M, Chen F, Matsuo Y et al. Treatment and prognosis of isolated local relapse after stereotactic body radiotherapy for clinical stage I non-small-cell lung cancer: importance of salvage surgery. J Thorac Oncol 2015; 10: 1616–1624.
104.	Dickhoff C, Dahele M, Paul MA et al. Salvage surgery for locoregional re- currence or persistent tumor after high dose chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer 2016; 94: 108–113.
105.	Verstegen NE, Maat AP, Lagerwaard FJ et al. Salvage surgery for local failures after stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for early stage non-small cell lung cancer. Radiat Oncol 2016; 11: 131.
106.	Chang JY, Bezjak A, Mornex F. IASLC Advanced Radiation Technology Committee. Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for centrally located early stage non–small-cell lung cancer: what we have learned. J Thorac Oncol 2015; 10: 577–585.
107.	Senthi S, Haasbeek CJ, Slotman BJ, Senan S. Outcomes of stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for central lung tumours: a systematic review. Radiother Oncol 2013; 106: 276–282.
108.	Tekatli H, Haasbeek N, Dahele M et al. Outcomes of hypofractionated high-dose radiotherapy in poor-risk patients with “ultracentral” non- small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2016; 11: 1081–1089.
109.	Ambrogi MC, Fanucchi O, Dini P et al. Wedge resection and radiofre- quency ablation for stage I non small cell lung cancer. Eur Respir J 2015; 45: 1089–1097.
110.	PORT Meta-analysis Trialists Group. Postoperative radiotherapy for non- small cell lung cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005; CD002142.
111.	Le Pe´choux C. Role of postoperative radiotherapy in resected non-small cell lung cancer: a reassessment based on new data. Oncologist 2011; 16: 672–681.
112.	Tsitsias T, Boulemden A, Ang K et al. The N2 paradox: similar out- comes of pre- and postoperatively identified single-zone N2a positive non-small-cell lung cancer. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2014; 45: 882–887.
 
113.	van Meerbeeck JP, Kramer GW, Van Schil PE et al. Randomized con- trolled trial of resection versus radiotherapy after induction chemother- apy in stage IIIA-N2 non-small-cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2007; 99: 442–450.
114.	Albain KS, Swann RS, Rusch VW et al. Radiotherapy plus chemotherapy with or without surgical resection for stage III non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase III randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2009; 374: 379–386.
115.	Pless M, Stupp R, Ris HR et al. Induction chemoradiation in stage IIIA/ N2 non-small-cell lung cancer: a phase 3 randomised trial. Lancet 2015; 386: 1049–1056.
116.	Eberhardt WE, Po¨ttgen C, Gauler TC et al. Phase III study of surgery versus definitive concurrent chemoradiotherapy boost in patients with resectable stage IIIA(N2) and selected IIIB non–small-cell lung cancer after induction chemotherapy and concurrent chemoradiotherapy (ESPATUE). J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 4194–4201.
117.	Senan S, Brade A, Wang LH et al. PROCLAIM: randomized phase III trial of pemetrexed-cisplatin or etoposide-cisplatin plus thoracic radiation ther- apy followed by consolidation chemotherapy in locally advanced nonsqua- mous non–small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 953–962.
118.	Ahn JS, Ahn YC, Kim JH et al. Multinational randomized phase III trial with or without consolidation chemotherapy using docetaxel and cisplatin after con-current chemoradiation in inoperable stage III non–small-cell lung cancer: KCSG-LU05-04. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 2660–2666.
119.	Vokes EE, Herndon JE II, Kelley MJ et al. Induction chemotherapy fol- lowed by chemoradiotherapy compared with chemoradiotherapy alone for regionally advanced unresectable stage III nonsmall-cell lung cancer: cancer and leukemia group B. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 1698–1704.
120.	Aupe´rin A, Le Pe´choux C, Rolland E et al. Meta-analysis of concomitant versus sequential radiochemotherapy in locally advanced non–small- cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 2181–2190.
121.	Warner A, Dahele M, Hu B et al. Factors associated with early mortality in patients treated with concurrent chemoradiation therapy for locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2016; 94: 612–620.
122.	Kelly K, Altorki NK, Eberhardt WE et al. Adjuvant erlotinib versus pla- cebo in patients with stage IB-IIIA non-small-cell lung cancer (RADIANT): a randomized, double-blind, phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 4007–4014.
123.	Hu Y, McMurry TL, Isbell JM et al. Readmission after lung resection is associated with a 6-fold increase in 90-day postoperative mortality. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2014; 148: 2261–2267.
124.	Pezzi CM, Mallin K, Mendez AS et al. Ninety-day mortality after resec- tion for lung cancer is nearly double 30-day mortality. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2014; 148: 2269–2277.
125.	Janssen-Heijnen ML, van Erning FN, de Ruysscher DK et al. Variation in causes of death in patients with non-small cell lung
 
cancer according to stage and time since diagnosis. Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 902–907.
126.	Lou F, Huang J, Sima CS et al. Patterns of recurrence and second pri- mary lung cancer in early-stage lung cancer survivors followed with routine computed tomography surveillance. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2013; 145: 75–81. Discussion 81–82.
127.	Demicheli R, Fornili M, Ambrogi F et al. Recurrence dynamics for non- small-cell-lung cancer: effect of surgery on the develoment of metasta- ses. J Thorac Oncol 2012; 7: 723–730.
128.	Johnson BE. Second lung cancers in patients after treatment for an ini- tial lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1998; 90: 1335–1345.
129.	Ripley RT, McMillan RR, Sima CS et al. Second primary lung cancers: smokers versus nonsmokers after resection of stage I lung adenocarcin- oma. Ann Thorac Surg 2014; 98: 968–974.
130.	Voltolini L, Paladini P, Luzzi L et al. Iterative surgical resections for local recurrent and second primary bronchogenic carcinoma. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2000; 18: 529–534.
131.	Hung JJ, Hsu WH, Hsieh CC et al. Post-recurrence survival in com- pletely resected stage I non-small cell lung cancer with local recurrence. Thorax 2009; 64: 192–196.
132.	Hamaji M, Allen MS, Cassivi SD et al. Surgical treatment of meta- chronous second primary lung cancer after complete resection of non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2013; 145: 683–690.
133.	Rosengart TK, Martini N, Ghosn P, Burt M. Multiple primary lung car- cinomas: prognosis and treatment. Ann Thorac Surg 1991; 52: 773–778.
134.	Spratt DE, Wu AJ, Adeseye V et al. Recurrence patterns and second pri- mary lung cancers after stereotactic body radiation therapy for early- stage non small-cell lung cancer: implications for surveillance. Clin Lung Cancer 2016; 17: 177–183.e2.
135.	Huang K, Senthi S, Palma DA et al. High-risk CT features for detection of local recurrence after stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for lung can- cer. Radiother Oncol 2013; 109: 51–57.
136.	Peulen H, Mantel F, Guckenberger M et al. Validation of high-risk com- puted tomography features for detection of local recurrence after stereotactic body radiation therapy for early-stage non-small cell lung cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2016; 96: 134–141.
137.	De Leyn P, Dooms C, Kuzdzal J et al. Revised ESTS guidelines for pre- operative mediastinal lymph node staging for non-small-cell lung can- cer. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2014; 3: 787–798.
138.	Lee TH, Marcantonio ER, Mangione CM et al. Derivation and prospec- tive validation of a simple index for prediction of cardiac risk of major noncardiac surgery. Circulation 1999; 100: 1043–1049.
139.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
