




 SPECIAL ARTICLE	

Endometrial cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up5
A. Oaknin1, T. J. Bosse2, C. L. Creutzberg3, G. Giornelli4, P. Harter5, F. Joly6,7, D. Lorusso8,9, C. Marth10, V. Makker11,12,
M. R. Mirza13, J. A. Ledermann14,15 & N. Colombo16,17, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Gynaecologic Cancer Programme, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Vall d’Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain; Departments of 2Pathology; 3Radiation Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands; 4Department of Oncology, Instituto Alexander Fleming, Buenos Aires, Argentina; 5Department of Gynecology & Gynecologic Oncology, Ev. Kliniken Essen-Mitte, Essen, Germany; 6ANTICIPE, Cancer and Cognition Platform, Normandie University, Caen; 7Medical Oncology Department, Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France; 8Department of Life Science and Public Health, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Largo Agostino Gemelli, Rome; 9Department of Women and Child Health, Division of Gynaecologic Oncology, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy; 10Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria;
11Gynecologic Medical Oncology Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York; 12Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, USA; 13Department of Oncology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark; 14Cancer Institute, University College London (UCL), London; 15Department of Oncology, UCL Hospitals, London, UK; 16Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Istituto Europeo di Oncologia IRCCS, Milan; 17Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy


Available online 8 June 2022



 

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Worldwide, endometrial cancer (EC) ranks seventh among all female cancers with the majority of cases occurring be- tween 65 and 75 years of age.1 In Europe, uterine cancer ranks fourth among female neoplasms, with an incidence of 12.9-20.2:100 000 and a low mortality rate: 2.0-2.7:100 000.2,3 This discrepancy is due to the fact that 80% of ECs are confined to the uterus at diagnosis and present with postmenopausal bleeding, which leads to prompt detection.1
EC is more prevalent in high/intermediate developed countries. Risk factors for EC include body mass index (BMI) (with an increased incidence   of   21%   for   BMI   22- 27.2,    43% for BMI 27.5-29-5 and    273% for BMI >30),
hypertension, hyperinsulinaemia and prolonged exposure
to unopposed estrogen (often related to nulliparity and infertility associated with polycystic ovarian syndrome or tamoxifen use).4,5
Mortality rates have been increasing by 1.9% per year on average, mainly attributed to the increasing incidence of obesity, a known risk factor for the most frequent type of EC.6,7

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5Note:  Approved by the  ESMO Guidelines Committee: October 2007, last update April 2022. This publication supersedes the previously published versiondAnn Oncol 2013; 24(Suppl 6):vi33-vi38.
0923-7534/© 2022 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 

ECs have traditionally been classified into two subtypes according to their histopathological characteristics (type 1 and 2).8 This classification system, however, is in a transition period and is being replaced by a clearly-defined system based on molecular phenotypes.9
Although >90% of ECs are sporadic, 5%-10% are hered- itary, usually as a part of the hereditary non-polyposis
colorectal cancer syndrome (HNPCC) or Lynch syndrome. Women with HNPCC have a 10-fold risk of developing EC, as well as an increased risk of colon and ovarian cancer. These are usually microsatellite-unstable tumours and tend to occur at a younger age.10

DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
The traditional dualistic histopathological classification coined by Bokhman split EC into two groups: type I and type II. The endometrioid subtype was categorised as type I, while all other histological subtypes were classified as type II cancers. Type II cancers were associated with a higher risk of relapse compared with type I.8 Tumours are graded ac- cording to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) defined criteria and are moving towards a two-tier grading combining grade 1 (G1) and grade 2 (G2) endometrioid carcinomas as low grade and grade 3 (G3) as high grade.11 In addition, multiple factors have been traditionally identified as high risk for recurrent disease: histological subtype, G3 histology, myometrial invasion
50%, lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI), lymph node metastases and tumour diameter >2 cm. Substantial LVSI is a major poor prognostic factor. Substantial LVSI is defined
 
A. Oaknin et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
as widespread invasion of tumour emboli into vascular spaces at and beyond the invasive front of the tumour. Substantial LVSI can be diagnosed on haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) slides without the need for additional immu- nostains. Although the extent of LVSI may vary per H&E slide, LVSI foci are often found in multiple slides. If the extent of LVSI is limited to fewer than four vessels, it is regarded as focal LVSI. Substantial LVSI is defined as four or more LVSI-positive vessels in at least one H&E slide. In contrast to substantial LVSI, minimal or focal LVSI has limited impact on prognosis.12-14 Alongside these charac- teristics, L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM) is another significant indicator of high-risk disease.15,16 Expression of L1CAM is most frequent in p53-abnormal (p53-abn) tu- mours but is also predictive of worse outcome among tu- mours with no specific molecular profile (NSMP).17,18
In recent years, it has become increasingly clear that the traditional classification lacks reproducibility and yields heterogenous molecular groups that hamper advances and implementation of precision medicine.19,20 This is particu- larly problematic for future clinical trials with targeted ap- proaches that will demand inclusion of cancers with molecular similarities. The EC classification originally pro- posed by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project serves this purpose well, as it is based upon the combination of somatic mutational burden and somatic copy number al- terations.9 This TCGA approach results in the molecular stratification of ECs into four distinct molecular groups; (i)
ultramutated [>100 mutations/megabase (mut/Mb)] with pathogenic variations in the exonuclease domain of DNA
polymerase epsilon (POLE)-ultramutated (POLEmut), (ii) hypermutated (10-100 mut/Mb), microsatellite-unstable,
(iii) somatic copy number-high with frequent pathogenic variants in TP53 and (iv) somatic copy number-low with frequently   phosphoinositide   3-kinase   (PI3K)   and   WNT
 
signalling abnormalities. Importantly, a range of publica- tions on large and clinically well-annotated (trial) cohorts have shown that surrogate markers can be utilised for a TCGA-inspired molecular classification in routine surgical pathology, without the need for extensive sequencing.18,21-23 This pragmatic alternative relies on a small number of well-established immunohistochemical (IHC) markers (MSH6, PMS2 and p53) in combination with targeted tumour sequencing (POLE hotspot analysis) and also automatically serves to pre-screen for Lynch syndrome as it incorporates reﬂex testing of the mismatch repair (MMR) proteins (Table 1).
A simple and clearly defined diagnostic algorithm for the molecular EC classification has been proposed24 (Figure 1). POLEmut EC can be diagnosed after the detection of a pathogenic mutation in the exonuclease domain of POLE. Guidance about the interpretation of pathogenic variants was recently described by Leon-Castillo et al.,25 allowing for uniform classification of POLEmut EC. Subsequently, for cases that do not carry a pathogenic POLE variant, immu- nostaining of at least two (PMS2 and MSH6) or preferably four (PMS2, MLH1, MSH6 and MSH2) of the MMR proteins is carried out. Complete loss of expression of one or more of these MMR proteins is sufficient for the diagnosis of MMR-deficient (dMMR) EC.26 Finally, p53 immunostaining serves as a near-perfect surrogate marker for an underlying TP53 mutation and is, therefore, used to classify EC as p53- abn (after excluding POLEmut and dMMR).27 Extensive study of these surrogate markers has shown a good rela- tionship to clinical outcome, establishing their prognostic value. POLEmut EC has an excellent outcome and p53-abn EC has the poorest clinical outcome, independent   of risk group, type of adjuvant treatment, tumour type or grade.21-23 This implies that de-escalation of adjuvant treatment of POLEmut EC patients should be explored, as is
 


Table 1. Molecular and clinicopathological features of endometrial cancer molecular subgroups
	POLEmut (i.e. POLE EDM)	dMMR (i.e. MSI)	NSMP (i.e. p53-wt)	p53aberrant (i.e. p53-abn, p53-mut)
Prevalence in
TCGA cohort, %	5-15	25-30	30-40	5-15
Associated molecular features	>100 mut/Mb,
SCNA-very low, MSS	10-100 mut/Mb, SCNA-low, MSI	<10 mut/Mb,
SCNA-low, MSS	<10 mut/Mb, SCNA-high, MSS
Most frequently associated histological features	Endometrioid Often high grade
Ambiguous morphology Prominent TILs and TLSs	Endometrioid Often high grade LVSI substantial Prominent TILs
MELF-type invasion	Mostly low grade Notable absence of TILs Squamous differentiation ER/PgR diffuse	All histological subtypes Mostly high grade
High cytonuclear atypia Low level of TILS
Associated clinical features	Lower BMI
Early stage (IA-IB)
Early onset	Higher BMI Lynch syndrome	Higher BMI	Lower BMI Advanced stage
Late onset
Diagnostic test	NGS/Sanger/Hotspot: P286R, V411L, S297F,
A456P, S459F	MMR-IHC: MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2
MSI assay		p53-IHC
Mutant-like/abnormal
staining
Prognosis	Excellent	Intermediate	Intermediate Stage-dependent	Poor
Adapted from McAlpine et al.,119 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.
BMI, body mass index; dMMR, mismatch repair deficient; EDM, exonuclease domain mutation; ER, estrogen receptor; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LVSI, lymphovascular space invasion; MELF, microcystic elongated and fragmented type of invasion; MMR-IHC, mismatch repair immunohistochemistry; MSI, microsatellite instability; MSS, microsatellite stable; mut/Mb, mutations/megabase; NGS, next-generation sequencing; NSMP, no specific molecular profile; p53-abn, p53-abnormal; p53-mut, p53-mutant; p53-wt, p53-wild type; PgR, progesterone receptor; POLE, polymerase epsilon; POLEmut, polymerase epsilon-ultramutated; SCNA, somatic copy number alteration; TCGA, The Cancer Genome Atlas; TIL, tumour infiltrating lymphocyte; TLS, tertiary lymphoid structure.
 
Annals of Oncology	A. Oaknin et al.


Figure 1. Diagnostic algorithm for the integrated molecular EC classiﬁcation.
This algorithm can be applied to all histological subtypes of EC (including carcinosarcomas). Please refer to manuscript for further information on POLEmut analysis indication.
dMMR, mismatch repair deficient; EC, endometrial cancer; MMR, mismatch repair; NSMP, no specific molecular profile; p53-mut, p53-mutant; pMMR, mismatch repair- proficient; POLE, polymerase epsilon; POLEmut, polymerase epsilon-ultramutated.
aPathogenic POLE variants include p.Pro286Arg, p.Val411Leu, p.Ser297Phe, p.Ala456Pro and p.Ser459Phe.25 bMMR deficiency is defined by loss of one or more MMR proteins (MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 and MSH6).
cp53 immunohistochemistry is an acceptable surrogate marker for TP53 mutation status in MMR-proficient, POLE wild-type EC.27 Permission to use figure under a Creative Commons CC BY License, Wiley https://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/.24

 
currently being done in the clinical Postoperative Radiation Therapy in Endometrial Cancer (PORTEC)-4a trial.28 Furthermore, recent data suggest that the greatest benefit for the addition of chemotherapy (ChT) in the adjuvant setting is for those ECs harbouring p53-abn which includes most serous cancers but also a significant portion of other histological subtypes such as carcinosarcomas.23 This shows how the molecular EC classification has the potential to improve patient management, reducing over- and undertreatment.
In future trial designs, molecular classification should be encouraged as it would allow comparison between groups of patients sharing similar/analagous features.
Molecular classification has been shown to be prognos- tically enlightening in low-, intermediate- and high-risk EC. Therefore, well-established IHC staining for p53 and MMR proteins (MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6) is now recommended as standard practice for all EC pathology specimens regardless of histological type and to complete the molec- ular classification following the diagnostic algorithm (Figure 1), by sequencing the exonuclease domain of POLE where available. As not all laboratories are currently able to carry out the molecular classification on all ECs,
 
prioritisation of molecular classification should be done for cases where results are relevant to guiding adjuvant treat- ment recommendations. It applies particularly to those classified as being high grade or at high stage ( FIGO stage II), as the clinical consequences for these patients will be most pronounced.
In this transition phase, in which two EC classification systems exist, it is recommended that the classification system used is specified. As with other tumour sites un- dergoing a similar transition, ECs that have not (completely) been molecularly classified should be designated as EC not- otherwise-specified (EC-NOS) and continue the use of the histology-based classification system [e.g. endometrioid- type EC (EEC-NOS)].24 This additional note will improve clarity for caretakers and patients. The histology-based classification remains unchanged and distinguishes endo- metrioid, serous, clear-cell and un/dedifferentiated EC. Uterine carcinosarcomas are metaplastic carcinomas with molecular features that overlap with serous and endome- trioid adenocarcinomas and, therefore, should be included in this list of ‘epithelial endometrial malignancies’. Data on the prognostic and predictive value of the molecular clas- sification for the rarer (non-endometrioid) histological EC
 
A. Oaknin et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
variants are still limited to pilot studies; however, all mo- lecular classes are identified in all histological subtypes.29,30

Recommendations
Histological type, FIGO grade, myometrial invasion and LVSI (focal/substantial) should be described for all EC pathology specimens [V, A].
Molecular classification through well-established IHC staining for p53 and MMR proteins (MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6) in combination with targeted tumour sequencing (POLE hotspot analysis) should be carried out for all EC pathology specimens regardless of histolog- ical type [IV, A].


STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Although EC is a surgically-staged disease according to the FIGO system (Supplementary Table S1, available at https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.05.009), preoperative stag- ing may help to establish a recurrence risk group and to define resulting surgical management, mainly on the basis of assessment of myometrial/cervical invasion and lymph node metastases. The preoperative work-up includes clinical and gynaecological examination, transvaginal ultrasound, a full blood count and liver and renal function profiles. Of note, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is considered the most accurate imaging technique for preoperative assessment of EC due to its excellent soft tissue contrast resolution. Depth of myometrial invasion and cervical stromal invasion are both
 
important aspects of EC staging. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI and T2-weighted images are useful tools in the assess- ment of these features, with an accuracy of 98% and 90% for assessing myometrial and cervical stromal invasion, respec- tively.31 An abdominal and thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan should be considered for investigating the presence of extrapelvic disease. [18F]2-Fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose-posi- tron emission tomography (FDG-PET)-CT demonstrates high specificity and positive predictive value for detecting distant metastases.32 FDG-PET-CT has an excellent diagnostic per- formance for detecting lymph node metastasis preopera- tively and disease recurrence post-operatively in EC patients and can be considered as an additional diagnostic proced- ure.33 EC is diagnosed after histopathological examination of samples from dilation and curettage (D&C), or Pipelle biopsy. Hysteroscopy may be helpful to have a representative biopsy or for removal of the target lesion.

Recommendations
Obtaining endometrial sampling by biopsy or D&C are acceptable initial approaches to histological diagnosis of EC [IV, A].
The preoperative work-up should include clinical and gynaecological examination, transvaginal ultrasound, pel- vic MRI, a full blood count and liver and renal function profiles [IV, B].
Additional imaging tests (e.g. thoracic and abdominal CT scan and/or FDG-PET-CT) may be considered in those pa- tients at high risk of extrapelvic disease [IV, C].
 


 
Figure 2. Stage I EC: surgery.
Purple: general categories or stratification; red: surgery; white: other aspects of management. EC, endometrial cancer; EEC, endometrioid-type endometrial cancer; LNE, lymphadenectomy. aExcept in those restricted to polyps.
 
Annals of Oncology	A. Oaknin et al.

 
MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL AND LOCOREGIONAL DISEASE
Surgery
In early-stage EC, the aim of surgery is to remove macro- scopic tumour, examine for microscopic metastases and stage the tumour to assess the need for adjuvant therapy (see Figure 2). Laparotomy has been the traditional surgical approach for the treatment of EC. Large, randomised trials and a meta-analysis have demonstrated that minimally invasive techniques have operative outcomes similar to laparotomy with respect to prognosis.34,35 Even though the majority of patients included in these trials were low risk (e.g. G1 or G2), with only 17% of patients at higher risk (e.g. defined by G3), the laparoscopic approach can be extended to G3 tumours, since detrimental effects were not demonstrated. A robotic approach is a potential enhance- ment to standard laparoscopic surgery and may be espe- cially beneficial in obese women. Standard surgery is hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Pres- ervation of ovaries can be considered in premenopausal patients with FIGO stage IA G1 EEC. Ovarian preservation is not recommended for patients at genetic risk for ovarian cancer (e.g. germline BRCA mutation, Lynch syndrome). Staging omentectomy should be considered in carcinosar- coma and serous type EC.
The risk of lymph node metastases ranges between <5% and 40% depending on grade, myometrial invasion and
histology. Because the detection of lymph node metastases has an impact on adjuvant therapy, evaluation of lymph node status is recommended in patients with non- endometrioid histology, FIGO IB or G3 disease. Lymph node evaluation could be omitted in endometrioid FIGO IA G1-G2 disease since the risk of nodal metastasis is very low (<5%).36
Two prospective randomised trials have investigated the
effect of systematic pelvic lymphadenectomy (LNE) in EC.37,38 These studies have not been able to demonstrate an improvement in prognosis, associated with LNE. Subse- quently, multiple reasons were discussed to explain the results, such as the inclusion of patients with low-risk tu- mours, insufficient surgical quality and imbalance in adju- vant therapy. Therefore, it was concluded that both trials have shown that systematic LNE is not indicated in stage IA G1-G2 endometrioid tumours, but the trials could not provide firm guidance regarding optimal management of patients at a higher risk. The question of systematic LNE is being assessed in the ECLAT trial (NCT03438474).
Sentinel node biopsy or sentinel LNE has emerged as alternative to lymph node dissection for lymph node stag- ing. The sensitivity of sentinel LNE as a lymph node staging approach in early-stage EC patients has been endorsed by multiple studies favouring its implementation in surgical management.39,40 The FIRES trial, the largest prospective cohort analysing the role of sentinel LNE in stage I EC, has shown that this approach can safely identify sentinel lymph nodes in EC. Currently the only data that support the sentinel LNE in terms of prognosis have been obtained from retrospective studies. Results from randomised clinical trials
 
with a survival endpoint are still lacking. Sentinel LNE with indocyanine green is reported to be feasible and yields the best results from a technical perspective and is therefore the preferred method.41 Whether a positive pelvic sentinel lymph node evaluation indicates further retroperitoneal staging (pelvic and/or para-aortic LNE) is not yet defined. In conclusion, and based on data provided by prospective and retrospective studies,39,40 sentinel lymph node biopsy can be considered for staging purposes in patients with low- risk/intermediate-risk disease. It may also represent an alternative to systematic LNE in high-intermediate-risk/ high-risk disease stage I-II.
Cytoreductive surgery with the aim of complete resection should be considered in stage III and IV EC (including car- cinosarcoma)42 if feasible and with acceptable morbidity, following full preoperative staging. There seems to be no role for so called suboptimal debulking to residual disease of 1-10 mm like in ovarian cancer.43

Adjuvant treatment
The most recently published randomised trials of adjuvant treatment used a long-standing risk-based approach to enrol patients, dependent on stage and pathological fea- tures. Recent data, however, suggest that the risk of recurrence needs to take into account the molecular fea- tures of the tumour. A molecular classification has been proposed to improve the evaluation of recurrence risk. This is now incorporated into guidelines to aid decision-making regarding adjuvant treatment.
Traditional clinicopathological risk factors, especially age, histopathological type and grade, myometrial invasion and LVSI are important in assessing prognosis. More recently, it has been shown that when LVSI is substantial (also called unequivocal or obvious), there is a greatly increased risk of recurrence and death.12,44
As described in the previous sections, TCGA has identified four molecular EC subgroups with significant prognostic differences among them.9 These clinically relevant molec- ular subgroups have been replicated using surrogate markers in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues, identifying equivalent subgroups: p53-abn, POLEmut, dMMR and NSMP.18,22,45,46 The integration of this molecu- lar classification with the well-established clinicopatholog- ical data has resulted in an updated risk classification system to establish the relative risk of recurrence. This system can now be used to explore molecularly-targeted therapy within these subgroups (Table 2).
All recommendations apply to women with FIGO stage I- IVA EC who undergo surgery and do not have any macro- scopic residual disease.

Low-risk EC
There is no indication for adjuvant treatment of low-risk EC as the risk of recurrence is low (see Figure 3). Multiple studies have shown no survival benefit from adjuvant treatment and the occasional patient with a local recur- rence can effectively be treated with radiotherapy (RT) at
 
A. Oaknin et al.	Annals of Oncology

Table 2. EC risk groups

Risk group	
Descriptiona
Low risk	Stage IA (G1-G2) with endometrioid type (dMMRb and NSMP) and no or focal LVSI
Stage I/II POLEmut cancer; for stage III POLEmut cancersc
Intermediate risk	Stage IA G3 with endometrioid type (dMMR and NSMP) and no or focal LVSI
Stage IA non-endometrioid type (serous, clear-cell, undifferentiated carcinoma, carcinosarcoma, mixed) and/or p53-abn cancers without myometrial invasion and no or focal LVSI
Stage IB (G1-G2) with endometrioid type (dMMR and NSMP) and no or focal LVSI
Stage II G1 endometrioid type (dMMR and NSMP) and no or focal LVSI
High-intermediate risk	Stage I endometrioid type (dMMR and NSMP) any grade and any depth of invasion with substantial LVSI Stage IB G3 with endometrioid type (dMMR and NSMP) regardless of LVSI
Stage II G1 endometrioid type (dMMR and NSMP) with substantial LVSI
Stage II G2-G3 endometrioid type (dMMR and NSMP)
High risk	All stages and all histologies with p53-abn and myometrial invasion
All stages with serous or undifferentiated carcinoma including carcinosarcoma with myometrial invasion
All stage III and IVA with no residual tumour, regardless of histology and regardless of molecular subtypeb
dMMR, mismatch repair deficient; EC, endometrial cancer; G1-G3, grade 1-3; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LVSI, lymphovascular space invasion; MSI-H, microsatellite instability high/hypermutated; NSMP, no specific molecular profile; p53-abn, p53-abnormal; POLEmut, polymerase epsilon-ultramutated.
aStage III-IVA if completely resected without residual disease; table does not apply to stage III-IVA with residual disease or for stage IV.
bdMMR and MSI-H: Both terms identify a similar EC population. Identification of a defective mismatch repair pathway by IHC (i.e. dMMR) or sequencing to determining microsatellite instability (i.e. MSI-H).
cPOLEmut stage III might be considered as low risk. Nevertheless, currently there are no data regarding safety of omitting adjuvant therapy.

 
the time of recurrence.47-49 Current data from the PORTEC- 1/2 studies and additional series have demonstrated the presence of POLEmut as an indicator of a favourable EC prognosis, independent of other clinicopathological vari- ables. Hence, patients with stage I-II tumours and a POLEmut are now also considered to be low risk and un- likely to benefit from adjuvant treatment.18,45,50,51 POLEmut EC, however, comprises only a small subgroup (overall 5%-15% of EC) and it is infrequent to find this mutation in patients with advanced disease.18,23 Nevertheless, omitting adjuvant treatment is also an option among stage III POLEmut EC patients, although there are currently no available outcome data without adjuvant treatment. Clinical studies (observational) are strongly encouraged52,53 in this POLEmut EC group.


Intermediate-risk EC
Both PORTEC-1 and Gynaecology Oncology Group (GOG)-99 clinical trials demonstrated that pelvic RT significantly reduced locoregional recurrence in the intermediate-risk group, with the largest absolute reductions in the desig- nated high-intermediate-risk groups.47,48 As the majority of recurrences for those cases were in the vaginal vault, PORTEC-2 evaluated the efficacy and toxicity of vaginal brachytherapy (VBT) compared with external beam RT (EBRT) in the PORTEC-1 defined high-intermediate group (see Figure 3). Ten-year survival data confirmed excellent
vaginal control rates (>96%) in both arms, with similar rates of isolated pelvic recurrence, distant metastasis and overall
survival (OS).53-55 Moreover, in this long-term analysis, substantial LVSI, p53-abn and L1CAM overexpression were all strongly associated with a higher risk of recurrence. Among those patients with any of these unfavourable risk factors, EBRT provided a better control than VBT. Therefore, patients with any of these features are no longer classified as intermediate risk.18,19,55
 
A Danish population study confirmed that the risk of locoregional relapse was higher (w14%) with omission of VBT, but the OS was no different due to successful treat- ment of relapse.56 According to these data, the omission of adjuvant treatment may be considered in individualised cases following patient counselling.
Within this intermediate group are those patients with stage IA non-endometrioid and/or p53-abn cancers without myometrial invasion and no or focal LVSI. It should be noted that these patients were not included in the randomised trials. Therefore, the potential benefit of adjuvant therapy for those patients is unclear; consequently, the recom- mendation for adjuvant treatment or observation should be considered on a case-by-case basis following multidisci- plinary discussion.


High-intermediate-risk EC
The traditional high-intermediate-risk EC group, defined in both PORTEC-1 and GOG-99 (e.g. age 70 years or older with one uterine risk factor, age 50 years or older with two uterine risk factors or age 18 years or older with three uterine risk factors: uterine risk factors include G2 or G3 tumour, outer-half depth of invasion and lymphovascular invasion) has been modified due to further knowledge regarding molecular and clinicopathological characteris- tics.18,55 This re-defined group, as described in Table 2, comprises a group with a higher risk of recurrence. Hence, the potential benefit of ChT to decrease disease recurrence in this EC group has been addressed in several trials, none of which included exactly the same risk population. Two of these studies, both published more than a decade ago, evaluated adjuvant platinum-based ChT versus RT and found no OS advantage.57,58 The pooled analysis of the ManGO ILIADE-III trial and NSGO-EC-9501/EORTC-55991
trial comparing RT with RT plus ChT showed that although progression-free    survival    (PFS)    was    improved    with
 

Volume 33 ■ Issue 9 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.05.009	865
 
Annals of Oncology	A. Oaknin et al.


 
Figure 3. Stage I-IVA EC: adjuvant therapy for low- and intermediate-risk patients.
Purple: general categories or stratification; green: RT; white: other aspects of management. Further therapeutic options are described in the manuscript.
dMMR, mismatch repair deficient; EC, endometrial cancer; EEC, endometrioid-type endometrial cancer; LVSI, lymphovascular space invasion; NSMP, no specific mo- lecular profile; p53-abn, p53-abnormal; POLEmut, polymerase epsilon-ultramutated; RT radiotherapy; VBT, vaginal brachytherapy.
aIf completely resected without residual disease.

 

combined therapy, the OS trend did not reach statistical significance.59 Recently, the phase III trial GOG-249 analysed the impact on recurrence-free survival (RFS) of substituting pelvic RT for VBT followed by three cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with high-intermediate-risk EC. The trial enrolled women meeting GOG-99 high-intermediate- risk criteria and/or stage II or stage I-II serous or clear-cell carcinoma. Remarkably, 89% had LNE and were node- negative. The 5-year RFS and OS showed no differences between both arms. Acute adverse events of grade 2 were found in 94% of patients receiving ChT and VBT versus 44% of those assigned to RT. At 24 months, sensory neu-
ropathy of grade 2 was significantly worse in the ChT/VBT arm at 10% versus <1% with RT. Although the assessment of long-term side-effects would need a longer follow-up, these results have led the authors to conclude that pelvic RT remained the appropriate standard treatment of high- risk early-stage disease.60
Moreover, the recent PORTEC-3 trial provides further data to define better treatment approaches.61,62 This trial evalu- ated the role of ChT during and after RT (CRT) versus pelvic RT alone in women with high-intermediate-risk and high-risk EC (stage IA G3 with LVSI; stage IB G3; stage II of any grade; stage
 

III endometrioid and stage IA-III uterine serous or clear-cell carcinoma). Of note, about half of patients had high-risk early-stage disease (including 28% G3 and 25% non- endometrioid EC), and 45% had stage III disease. The recently published update with a median follow-up of 72.6 months did show a significant improvement in 5-year OS and failure-free survival (FFS). When analysing results by stage, combined adjuvant treatment of those women with stage I-II non-serous cancers showed only a small absolute improve- ment (i.e. 2% in 5-year OS and 4% in FFS). In consequence, taking the results of the GOG-249 and PORTEC-3 trials together, the decision of combined treatment in these early stages should be discussed on a case-by-case basis, consid- ering the balance between the increased frequency of adverse events and the outcome benefit (see Figure 4).

High-risk EC
The adoption of a precise definition of high-risk EC has been challenging. Currently, stage III-IVA EC without residual disease or stage I-IVA p53-abn or non-endometrioid carci- nomas without residual disease with myometrial invasion are all considered high-risk EC.
 

866	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.05.009	Volume 33 ■ Issue 9 ■ 2022
 
A. Oaknin et al.	Annals of Oncology

Figure 4. Stage I-IVA EC: adjuvant therapy for intermediate- and high-risk patients.
Purple: general categories or stratification; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments. Further therapeutic options are described in the manuscript.
ChT, chemotherapy; dMMR, mismatch repair deficient; EBRT, external beam radiotherapy; EC, endometrial cancer; LVSI, lymphovascular space invasion; NSMP, no specific molecular profile; p53-abn, p53-abnormal; RT, radiotherapy.
aIf completely resected without residual disease.


 
The recent data from three relevant phase III trials (PORTEC-3, GOG-249 and GOG-258), enrolling high- intermediate-risk and high-risk EC patients, two of which were described in the previous section, are leading to a shift in the treatment paradigm.
Updated analysis of PORTEC-3, with a median follow-up of 72 months, showed a 5% OS benefit and a 7% benefit in FFS in the concurrent plus adjuvant ChT group, compared with RT alone. In the subgroup analysis, women with stage III EC along with those of serous histology obtained the greatest benefit of adding ChT to RT. Of note, only 105 patients with serous cancer were enrolled in PORTEC-3; thus, the number of women and events are too low to report on treatment effi- cacy across the different stages.61 Traditionally, clear-cell and serous cancers have been merged due to their worse prog- nosis. Nevertheless, in this PORTEC-3 analysis, the frequency of recurrence among women with clear-cell cancers (espe- cially p53 wild type) was similar to that of women with endometrioid tumours and markedly lower than that of women with serous cancers.
In terms of safety profile, the addition of ChT resulted in significantly higher treatment-related toxicity, but most differences resolved from 12 months onwards, with per- sisting differences in long-term G2 sensory neuropathy.
 
In the GOG-258 trial, 813 women with stage III-IVA EC were randomised to receive pelvic RT with concurrent and adjuvant ChT (same regimen as the PORTEC-3 trial) or to receive ChT alone (six cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel). Although no differences in RFS and OS were found, signif- icantly more vaginal and pelvic and/or para-aortic re- currences were seen in women treated with ChT alone.63 Taking into consideration the results from these two tri- als, the benefit obtained by adding ChT to RT and the resulting toxicity rate increase should be discussed as part of shared decision making between doctors and their pa- tients. While CRT is the recommended regimen for high-risk patients, RT alone may be recommended in cases of major comorbidities and contraindications to ChT.61
Given the strong emerging prognostic value of the EC molecular classification, the outcome and impact of ChT for each molecular subgroup was analysed using the tissue samples from PORTEC-3. The results showed that patients with p53-abn EC had the poorest prognosis regardless of histology, whereas POLEmut was the strongest favourable prognostic factor, even among high-grade and advance- stage cases. The treatment effect was also different within the molecular subgroups. Patients with p53-abn EC had a highly significant benefit from CRT regardless of the
 

Volume 33 ■ Issue 9 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.05.009	867
 
Annals of Oncology	A. Oaknin et al.

 
histological subtype and stage, whereas patients with POLEmut EC had an excellent survival in both treatment arms.
Patients with dMMR and NSMP EC, however, had an in- termediate outcome and when the differences in adjuvant treatment effect (CRT versus RT) were analysed among these molecular subgroups, no benefit was observed be- tween CRT and RT alone in patients with dMMR EC. Pa- tients with NSMP EC had a trend toward benefit from CRT, similar to the overall trial outcome.23
Carcinosarcomas, which are currently considered meta- plastic dedifferentiated ECs, have not been included in the trials cited above. They are uniformly regarded as high risk and most are classified as p53-abn EC. Recommendations for high-risk disease are largely applicable to carcinosar- comas as well and this histology should be included in the upcoming clinical trials.64

Recommendations
Hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is the standard surgical procedure in early-stage EC [I, A]. Minimally invasive surgery is the recommended approach in stage I G1-G2 EC [I, A].
Minimally invasive surgery may also be the preferred surgical approach in stage I G3 [II, A].
Ovarian preservation can be considered in premeno- pausal women with stage IA G1 EEC [IV, A].
Sentinel LNE can be considered as a strategy for nodal assessment in low-risk/intermediate-risk EC (e.g. stage IA G1-G3 and stage IB G1-G2) [II, A]. It can be omitted in cases without myometrial invasion. Systematic LNE is not recommended in this group [II, D].
Surgical lymph node staging should be carried out in pa- tients with high-intermediate-risk/high-risk disease. Sentinel lymph node biopsy is an acceptable alternative to systematic LNE for lymph node staging in high- intermediate-risk/high-risk stage I-II [III, B].
Full surgical staging including omentectomy, peritoneal biopsies and lymph node staging should be considered in serous ECs and carcinosarcomas [IV, B].
When feasible, and with acceptable morbidity, cytore- ductive surgery to a maximal surgical extent should be considered in stage III and IV [IV, B].

Low-risk EC
For patients with stage IA (G1 and G2) with endome- trioid (dMMR and NSMP) type and no or focal LVSI, adju- vant treatment is not recommended [I, E].
For patients with stage IA non-endometrioid type (and/ or p53-abn), without myometrial invasion and no or focal LVSI, adjuvant treatment is not recommended [III, E]. For patients with stage I-II POLEmut cancers adjuvant treatment is not recommended [III, D].
For patients with stage III POLEmut cancers, treatment within the scope of clinical trials is recommended but no adjuvant treatment is also an option [III, C].
 
Intermediate-risk EC
For patients with stage IA G3 endometrioid (dMMR and NSMP) type and no or focal LVSI, adjuvant VBT is recom- mended to decrease vaginal recurrence [I, A].
For patients with stage IB G1-G2 endometrioid (dMMR and NSMP) type and no or focal LVSI, adjuvant VBT is recommended to decrease vaginal recurrence [I, A].
For patients with stage II G1 endometrioid cancer (dMMR and NSMP) and no or focal LVSI, adjuvant VBT is recommended to decrease vaginal recurrence [II, B]. Omission of adjuvant VBT can be considered (especially for patients aged <60 years) for all above stages, after pa- tient counselling and with appropriate follow-up [III, C].

High-intermediate-risk EC with lymph node staging (pN0). For patients with stage IA and IB with substantial LVSI, stage IB G3, stage II G1 with substantial LVSI and stage II G2-G3 (dMMR and NSMP):
o	Adjuvant EBRT is recommended [I, A].
o	Adding (concomitant and/or sequential) ChT to EBRT could be considered, especially for G3 and/or substan- tial LVSI [II, C].
o	Adjuvant VBT (instead of EBRT) could be recommen- ded to decrease vaginal recurrence, especially for those without substantial LVSI [II, C].
o	With close follow-up, omission of any adjuvant treat- ment is an option following shared decision making with the patient [IV, C].

High-intermediate-risk EC without lymph node staging.
For patients with stage IA and IB with substantial LVSI, stage IB G3, stage II G1 with substantial LVSI and stage II G2-G3 (dMMR and NSMP):
o	Adjuvant EBRT is recommended [I, A].
o	Adding (concomitant and/or sequential) ChT to EBRT could be considered especially for substantial LVSI and G3 [II, C].
o	Adjuvant VBT could be considered for IB G3 without substantial LVSI to decrease vaginal recurrence [II, C].


HIGH-RISK EC
Adjuvant EBRT with concurrent and adjuvant ChT is rec- ommended [I, A].
●	Sequential ChT and RT can be used [I, C].
●	ChT alone is an alternative option [I, B].

RECURRENT/METASTATIC DISEASE
Outcomes of advanced/recurrent disease remain poor, with 5-year OS rates of 20%-25%.65 The treatment of patients with recurrent/metastatic EC should always require a multidisciplinary approach in specialised centres and should be guided by the patient’s condition, extent of the disease, prior therapies and molecular profile. Important prognostic factors impacting local control and survival in recurrent EC
 

868	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.05.009	Volume 33 ■ Issue 9 ■ 2022
 
A. Oaknin et al.	Annals of Oncology

Figure 5. Locoregional recurrent EC.
Purple: general categories or stratification; red: surgery; green: RT; blue: systemic anticancer therapy. Optional  
EBRT, external beam radiotherapy; EC, endometrial cancer; RT radiotherapy; VBT, vaginal brachytherapy.

 
include both site(s) and extension of the recurrence (e.g. isolated vaginal, pelvic; peritoneal carcinomatosis), tumour size ( 2 cm versus >2 cm), prior RT, relapse-free interval and histology. Indeed, a longer relapse-free interval, low- grade histology, isolated vaginal recurrence and endome- trioid histology are associated with a longer survival (see Figure 5).66,67

RT
Patients with recurrent EC following primary surgical pro- cedure alone may be appropriate candidates for RT, with salvage RT being the recommendation of choice in RT-naive patients with local or locoregional recurrence. Prognosis with isolated vaginal recurrence is more favourable compared with pelvic nodal recurrence.47 For selected pa- tients with small vaginal recurrences who have not received prior RT, RT may be curative.
The use of primary RT inﬂuences sites of recurrence and survival after relapse. As shown in PORTEC-1, survival is longer for patients with recurrent disease not previously treated with RT in the adjuvant setting.47,68 After an iso- lated vaginal recurrence, the 5-year survival rate for the non-irradiated group was 65%, compared with 43% for patients randomised to the adjuvant RT arm of PORTEC-1. Vaginal recurrences can be successfully treated with RT, with 5-year OS of 33%-84% and a 5-year disease-specific survival of 51%-77%,68-72 with a combination of RT plus VBT providing the best outcomes.73
Rates of pelvic-limited recurrences vary from 4.9% at 8 years in low-risk disease47 to 26% at 3 years in high-risk disease. For patients with a pelvic recurrence, the 3-year
 
survival rate is 8%, compared with 73% for those with iso- lated vaginal recurrences.47,68 This survival rate is compa- rable to the 3-year survival rate for patients with distant metastatic disease.47,68 Considering that the poor prognosis associated with pelvic recurrence mainly comprises high- risk distant failures, combining salvage RT with systemic therapy could improve the therapeutic gain of salvage RT.

Surgery
RT is the treatment of choice in previously non-irradiated patients with isolated vaginal or locoregional recurrence.74 For patients with recurrent disease who received prior RT, including resectable peritoneal and lymph node relapses, surgery should be considered only if complete resection of macroscopic disease appears feasible with an acceptable morbidity.75 To date, and acknowledging the limitations of data from retrospective studies, the only factor associated with an improved OS is achievement of complete debulking. Moreover, radical surgery procedure with the intention of this complete resection should be considered in specialised centres after excluding distant metastasis. Pelvic exentera- tion may be considered for central local relapse.76 The role of complementary ChT after surgery for recurrence is not well established due to the lack of studies that have prop- erly addressed this approach. In addition, various retro- spective series have shown conﬂicting results. Hence, the indication for ChT should be evaluated on an individualised basis.67,75,77 Surgery may also be an option in cases with oligometastatic disease (defined as a state of limited, one to five metastatic tumours) for which local ablative therapy could be a radical approach.78 Discussion of the cases in a
 
Annals of Oncology	A. Oaknin et al.

Figure 6. Metastatic EC.
Purple: general categories or stratification; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
AI, aromatase inhibitor; AUC, area under the curve; ChT, chemotherapy; dMMR, mismatch repair deficient; EC, endometrial cancer; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; MSS, microsatellite stable; pMMR, mismatch repair proficient.
aIn patients eligible for further treatment after failure of platinum-based therapy.
bESMO-MCBS v1.1116 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the European Medicines Agency or Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/ esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
cFDA approval is restricted to patients whose tumours are not MSI-H or dMMR.

 
multidisciplinary setting is critical to develop individualised treatment plans and to communicate potential side-effects and expected outcomes (see Figure 6).

Systemic therapy
For relapsed disease not amenable to surgery and/or RT, the standard approach remains ChT or hormonal therapy (see Figure 6). Currently, and following the results of GOG-209, carboplatin AUC 5-6 plus paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 every 21 days for six cycles should be considered the first-line therapy for advanced or recurrent EC. In this phase III trial, paclitaxelecarboplatin was not inferior to the cisplatine doxorubicinepaclitaxel (TAP) regimen with regard to efficacy [overall response rate (ORR) of 40%-50%; median PFS and OS of 14 and 32 months, respectively] and was associated with a more favourable toxicity profile.79 The combination of carboplatinepaclitaxel with antiangiogenic agent bev- acizumab failed to demonstrate a clear benefit with PFS [10.5 versus 13.7 months; hazard ratio (HR) 0.84, P 0.43]
and OS (29.7 versus 40.0 months; HR 0.71, P 0.24) with respect to standard of care.80 ChT treatment options beyond first-line therapy are limited with no standard of care iden- tified. Palliative options, such as taxanes and doxorubicin, display moderate activity (ORR of 20%).81-83
 
As mimicking the ovarian cancer treatment approach, the concept of ‘platinum-sensitivity and re-treatment with platinum’ has been investigated in several retrospective studies in the setting of recurrent EC. These studies have shown that platinum-based ChT re-challenge may be considered an option for selected patients who relapse >6 months since last platinum-based ChT.84,85
Hormonal therapy has formerly been accepted as first-line therapy for advanced EC, and given its safety profile and mode of administration, is still an attractive therapeutic option for a select group of patients.81,82 Factors reported to be predictive of response to endocrine therapy include low-grade endometrioid histology and, to a less clear extent, the status of estrogen receptor (ER)/progesterone receptor (PgR). While higher levels of ER and PgR expression are clearly associated with better outcomes in diseases such as breast cancer, the predictive value of ER/PgR in EC is confounded by both a lackof standardisation in tissue processing and clear cut-off limits. It is possible, however, to infer an association between ER/PgR status and response rates to endocrine therapy, with higher responses in ER/PgR-positive tumours. Having said this, re- sponses have also been reported in ER/PgR-negative tu- mours.86 Moreover, due to reported differences in ER/PgR status between primary and recurrent disease, the optimal timing and selection of tissue for determining receptor status
 
A. Oaknin et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
remains an unresolved issue. The standard agents for treat- ment of patients with recurrent EC are progestins. A recent summary analysis of progestins used as first-line therapy for metastatic/recurrent EC found an ORR of 23.3%, a median PFS of 2.9 months and a median OS of 9.2 months.87 Alternative options include, tamoxifen, fulvestrant and aromatase in- hibitors (AIs). In the recent PARAGON trial, anastrozole showed a clinical benefit rate of 44%, with 7% overall responses.88
Immune checkpoint blockade monotherapy in advanced EC. Given that w30% of primary ECs are microsatellite instability-high/dMMR (MSI-H/dMMR), indicating immune dysregulation, immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy has been explored both as monotherapy and in combina- tion with cytotoxic ChT, other immunotherapy or targeted agents. A pivotal therapeutic advance was the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) accelerated approval of pem- brolizumab [anti-programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)] for the treatment of advanced MSI-H or dMMR solid tu- mours. This marked the first approval of a tumour-agnostic, histology-independent cancer therapy in which treatment is based on a common tumour biomarker rather than the anatomical location of origin. The KEYNOTE-158 trial of pembrolizumab across 27 advanced MSI-H/dMMR solid tumours confirmed the activity on EC population and identified the presence of tumour mutational burden-high (TMB-H) biomarker [defined as   10 mut/Mb] as a predic- tor of response to pembrolizumab.89 These data led to accelerated FDA approval for pembrolizumab for the treatment of TMB-H solid tumours (as determined by the FoundationOne CDx assay) that have progressed following prior therapy, including EC. Other anti-PD-1/programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) agents that have shown encour- aging activity in dMMR EC include avelumab,90 durvalu- mab91 and dostarlimab.92 The activity and safety of dostarlimab were analysed in the GARNET trial. This ongoing phase Ib study has enrolled 104 patients with dMMR EC. Of these, 71 had measurable disease at baseline and 6 months follow-up and were included in the primary analysis. The confirmed ORR was 42.3% (a confirmed complete or partial response was seen in 12.7% patients and 29.6%, respectively). The median duration of response was not reached (median follow-up was 11.2 months). In light of these results, on 22 and 23 April 2021, both the FDA and the European Medicines Agency (EMA), respectively, approved dostarlimab as monotherapy for the treatment of adult patients with recurrent or advanced dMMR/MSI-H EC that has progressed on or following prior treatment with a platinum-containing regimen (see Figure 6). Objective re- sponses have also been observed with atezolizumab (anti- PD-L1) and nivolumab in PD-L1-positive EC.93
ICB and antiangiogenic targeted agents. The FDA, Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration and Health Canada recently granted accelerated approval to the combination of the oral multikinase inhibitor lenvatinib (targets vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1-3, fibroblast growth factor receptors 1-4, platelet-derived growth factor receptor-a, RET and KIT) in
 
combination with pembrolizumab for the treatment of advanced EC that is not MSI-H or dMMR after platinum-based ChT.94 This was based on KEYNOTE 146, a phase Ib/II study of lenvatinib plus pembrolizumab in select solid tumours including EC (NCT02501096). In the final efficacy analysis, among 108 previously treated patients, the ORR was 38% at week 24 per investigator review per immune-related RECIST with median PFS and OS of 7.5 and 16.7 months, respectively. The ORR in the MMR-proficient (pMMR) (n 94) and dMMR (n 11) cohorts were 36% and 64%, respectively, and responses were seen regardless of MSI status, PD-L1 status or histology.94 Treatment-emergent adverse events, notably hypertension, fatigue and diarrhoea, were common and overall dose reductions or interruptions occurred in 65% and 72% patients, respectively.
The results from the phase III trial (KEYNOTE-775- NCT03517449) were presented at the Society of Gynaeco- logic Oncology virtual meeting in March 2021.The combination of pembrolizumab and lenvatinib led to a statistically signifi- cant improvement in OS (HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.51-0.75, P < 0.0001), PFS (HR 0.56, 95% CI 0.47-0.66, P < 0.0001) and
ORR (31.9% versus 14.7%) compared with standard ChT in
patients with previously treated advanced EC, therefore meeting its dual primary endpoints and key secondary endpoint.95 In addition, this combination is under investigation as first-line therapy versus carboplatin and paclitaxel ChT in advanced EC (NCT03884101). In light of these results, on 21 July 2021, the FDA approved pembrolizumab in combination with lenvatinib for patients with advanced EC that is neither MSI-H nor dMMR, and who have disease progression following prior systemic therapy in any setting and are not candidates for curative surgery or RT. In addition, on 20 January 2022, the EMA approved the same regimen, pembrolizumab in combination with lenvatinib, for the treatment of advanced or recurrent EC in adults who have disease progression on or following prior treatment with a platinum-containing therapy in any setting, regardless of MMR status and who are not candidates for curative surgery or RT (see Figure 6).96
Targeted therapy approaches. The cyclin-dependent ki- nases (CDKs) are a family of serineethreonine kinases involved in cell-cycle progression. In preclinical and clinical studies, palbociclib, a selective inhibitor of the CDKs, CDK4 and CDK6, has been shown to reverse endocrine resistance and inhibit the growth of ER-positive breast cancer cells synergistically with antiestrogens, and the combination of letrozole and palbociclib has been approved for the treat- ment of hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative breast cancer.97 Interim results of the phase II ENGOT EN3 PALEO trial in previously treated endometrioid EC tumours that were ER- positive showed that letrozole plus palbociclib significantly improved PFS compared with letrozole plus placebo: me- dian 8.3 versus 3.0 months, respectively; (HR 0.56, 95% CI
0.32-0.98, P     0.041).98
The PI3K pathway is one of the most frequently pathogeni- cally activated pathways in EC, and is pivotal in proliferation, survival, metastasis, metabolism and angiogenesis.99 Several
 
Annals of Oncology	A. Oaknin et al.

 
phase II studies investigating PI3K inhibitors both as mono- therapy and in combination in recurrent EC have demonstrated ORR ranging from 4% to 32%. Despite the promising efficacy observed with these combinations, their safety profiles have compromised their further development.100 In the GOG-86P randomised phase II study, recurrent/metastatic EC patients were allocated to three different arms: carboplatine paclitaxeletemsirolimus, paclitaxelecarboplatinebevacizu- mab and ixabepiloneecarboplatinebevacizumab. The trial failed to show a significant PFS difference with respect to his- torical control, namely the carboplatinepaclitaxel arm of trial GOG209.101
The HER2 (ERBB2) gene is amplified in 17%-33% of uterine carcinosarcomas and serous carcinomas.102,103 A small randomised phase II trial of carboplatinepaclitaxel with or without trastuzumab in HER2/neu-positive serous EC showed an increase in both PFS and OS for those receiving trastuzumab.104
Adavosertib, a WEE1 inhibitor, reported 29.4% ORR and 38.2% clinical benefit in a population of 34 heavily pre- treated serous EC patients.105 This promising preliminary activity warrants further investigation.
Future directions. Numerous ICB combination strategies with targeted therapies, other immunotherapeutic agents, ChT and RT are currently ongoing and have the potential to alter the EC treatment landscape.


Recommendations
For patients with locoregional recurrence following primary surgery alone, the preferred primary therapy should be RT with VBT [IV, A].
Adding systemic therapy to salvage RT could be consid- ered [IV, C].
For patients with recurrent disease following RT, surgery should be considered only if a complete debulking with acceptable morbidity is anticipated [IV, C].
Complementary systemic therapy after surgery could be considered [IV, C].
The first-line standard ChT treatment is carboplatin AUC 5-6 plus paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 every 21 days for six cycles [I, A]. Hormone therapy could be considered as front-line sys- temic therapy for patients with low-grade carcinomas endometrioid histology [III, A].
Progestins (medroxyprogesterone acetate 200 mg and megestrol acetate 160 mg) are the recommended agents [II, A].
Other options for hormonal therapies include AIs, tamox- ifen and fulvestrant [III, C].
There is no standard of care for second-line ChT. Doxoru- bicin and weekly paclitaxel are considered the most active therapies [IV, C].
ICB monotherapy could be considered after platinum- based therapy failure in patients with MSI-H/dMMR EC [III, B].
Dostarlimab has recently been approved by both the EMA and the FDA for this indication [III, B; European
 
Society for Medical Oncology-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS) v1.1 score: 3].
Pembrolizumab is FDA approved for the treatment of TMB- H solid tumours (as determined by the FoundationOne CDx assay) that have progressed following prior therapy for EC [III, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; not EMA approved].
Pembrolizumabelenvatinib is approved by the EMA for EC patients who have failed a previous platinum-based ChT, and who are not candidates for curative surgery or RT. FDA approval is for EC patients whose tumours are not dMMR/MSI-H [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].

FOLLOW-UP, LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND SURVIVORSHIP
With >80% of patients diagnosed in the early stages of the disease and an excellent prognosis (5-year survival rate
>95% for stage I), a large number of patients with EC will be long-term survivors. Awareness and management of the long-term effects of EC and its treatment are important.

Surveillance of recurrence
Most EC recurrences occur within 3 years of initial treatment and in most recurrences are associated with symptoms. Therefore, the probability of detecting a relapse during a planned follow-up consultation among asymptomatic patients is quite low.106-108 There is no evidence from rand- omised studies for the role of intensive doctor-led, hospital- based surveillance in EC follow-up evaluation and no consensus on what testing should be utilised.109 Therefore, medical surveillance can be adjusted to risk factors.
For low-risk groups, the suggested frequency of follow-up is every 6 months with physical and gynaecological examination for the first 2 years, and then yearly until 5 years; in this group of patients, phone follow-up can be an alternative.110 Patient education regarding concerning signs and symptoms is a crit- ical component of post-treatment care. In the high-risk groups, physical and gynaecological examinations are recommended every 3 months for the first 3 years, and then every 6 months until 5 years. As CT scans detect only 15% of recurrences, routine use is not advocated. Nevertheless, it could be considered in the high-risk group, particularly if there was node extension (e.g. every 6 months the first 3 years and then on an individual basis). PET-CT has been shown to be more sensitive and specific for the assessment of suspected recur- rent EC; however, its use in routine follow-up has not been well studied111 and its indication must be individualised. The sensitivity and the specificity of cancer antigen 125 in EC are low and routine determination during follow-up is not rec- ommended. Finally, it should be noted that Pap smears have not been useful for detecting local recurrences.

Long-term side-effects and promotion of healthy life
In addition to evaluation of recurrence, patients should be encouraged to continue with recommended cancer screening programmes for breast and colorectal cancers and follow-up of comorbidities. EC patients suffer from different
 

872	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.05.009	Volume 33 ■ Issue 9 ■ 2022
 
A. Oaknin et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
comorbidities mainly linked with age and obesity with higher risk of long-term cardiovascular events.112
The main long-term symptoms reported by the patients are fatigue, psychosocial distress, sexuality and gynaeco- urinary disorders, chronic pain, lymphoedema and neu- ropathy (if ChT). Obesity is associated with low quality of life and physical function.113 Lifestyle interventions may improve fatigue, physical functioning and result in weight loss and psycho-educational programmes could improve mood disorders and sexuality complaints.114 Therefore, promotion of regular exercise, healthy diet and weight management should be addressed with all EC survivors.
Limited data are available on hormone replacement therapy, so the decision must be discussed with the patients who experience menopausal symptoms on the basis of benefit/risk.115

Recommendations
For low-risk EC, the proposed surveillance is every 6 months, with physical and gynaecological examination for the first 2 years and then yearly until 5 years [V, C]. In the low-risk group, phone follow-up can be an alterna- tive to hospital-based follow-up consultation [II, B].
For the high-risk groups, physical and gynaecological ex- aminations are recommended every 3 months for the first 3 years, and then every 6 months until 5 years [V, C]. A CT scan or PET-CT could be considered in the high-risk group, particularly if node extension was present [V, D]. Regular exercise, healthy diet and weight management should be promoted with all EC survivors [II, B].


METHODOLOGY
This Clinical Practice Guideline was developed in accor- dance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development (https://www. esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology). The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. An ESMO-MCBS table with ESMO-MCBS scores is included in Supplementary Table S2, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.2022.05.009. ESMO-MCBS v1.1116 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA (https://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/ ESMO-MCBS). The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee. The FDA/EMA or other regulatory body approval status of new therapies/indications is re- ported at the time of writing this Clinical Practice Guideline. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Supplementary Table S3, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc. 2022.05.009.117,118 Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the au- thors. Future updates to this Clinical Practice Guideline will be published on esmo.org as a Living Guideline version or an eUpdate, to be made available at: https://www.esmo. org/guidelines/gynaecological-cancers/endometrial-cancer.
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Manuscript editing support was provided by Louise Green, Sarah Escuin and Jennifer Lamarre (ESMO Guidelines staff); this support was funded by ESMO. Nathan Cherny, Chair of the ESMO-MCBS Working Group, Urani Dafni ESMO-MCBS Working Group Member/Frontier Science Foundation Hel- las and Giota Zygoura of Frontier Science Foundation Hellas provided review and validation of the ESMO-MCBS scores. Nicola Latino (ESMO Scientific Affairs staff) provided coor- dination and support of the ESMO-MCBS scores and Angela Corstorphine of Kstorfin Medical Communications provided medical writing and editing support in the preparation of the ESMO-MCBS table; this support was funded by ESMO.

FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.

DISCLOSURE
AO has served on advisory boards for AstraZeneca Farm- aceutica Spain, SA, AstraZeneca KK, Clovis Oncology, Cor- cept Therapeutics, Deciphera Pharmaceutical, Eisai Europe Limited, EMD Serono, Inc., Roche, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Got It Consulting SL, Immunogen, Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD) de España, Mersana Therapeutics, Novocure GmbH, PharmaMar, prIME Oncology, Roche, Shattuck Labs, Inc., Sutro Biopharma, Agenus and Tesaro and received support for travel or accommodation from Roche, AstraZeneca and PharmaMar, research funding paid directly to institution from AbbVie Deutschland, Ability Pharma, Advaxis Inc., Aeterna Zentaris, Amgen SA, Aprea Therapeutics AB, Clovis Oncology, Eisai, F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Regeneron Phar- maceuticals, ImmunoGen, MSD de España SA, Millennium Pharmaceuticals, PharmaMar SA, Tesaro and Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), participation to non-remunerated activities and non-remunerated leadership roles for GCIC and GEICO; TJB has received an invited speaker fee from GSK; CLC re- ports Varian research grant to institution for research on proton therapy for cervix cancers, Elekta research funding for planning platform to institution for brachytherapy research and honoraria compensation to institution for time spent on independent data monitoring committee from Merck; GG reports honoraria from AstraZeneca, MSD, GSK, Laboratorios Raffo, Pint Pharma, Janssen Cilag as speaker, consultant advisory board member and writer for MSD; PH reports personal fees and institutional research grants from AstraZeneca, Roche, GSK and ImmunoGen, institutional research support from Genmab, personal fees on advisory boards for MSD and Clovis, invited speaker fees for Amgen, Stryker and Zai Lab, personal fees from SOTIO, grants from Public funding (European Union, DKH, DFG), Boehringer Ingelheim and Medac; FJ reports honoraria for advisory boards from GSK, AstraZeneca, MSD, Janssen, Ipsen, BMS and Bayer, speaker fees from GSK, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Ipsen, Amgen, Sanofi, Clovis and Astellas and institutional funding for work in clinical trials from GSK and AstraZeneca
 
Annals of Oncology	A. Oaknin et al.

 
and a research grant from BMS; DL reports consultant honoraria from AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, GSK, MSD, ImmunoGen, Genmab, Amgen, Seagen and PharmaMar, invited speaker and member of advisory boards from AstraZeneca, invited member of advisory board from Merck Serono, invited speaker and member of advisory boards and receives direct research funding from Clovis Oncology, GSK, MSD and PharmaMar, institutional funding for work in clinical trials/contracted research from AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, GSK, MSD, Genmab, Seagen, ImmunoGen, Incyte, Novartis and Roche and participates in non-remunerated activities as principal investigator and non-remunerated leadership roles for GCIC; CM reports honoraria for advi- sory boards from Roche, Novartis, Amgen, MSD/Merck, PharmaMar, Seagen, AstraZeneca, Eisai and GSK and non- remunerated leadership roles for AGO-Austria, European Network for Gynaecological Oncological Trial groups and ABGSC; VM reports institutional research study support from MSD/Merck, Eisai, Clovis, Karyopharm, AstraZeneca and Zymeworks and non-remunerated activities for MSD/ Merck, Eisai, Clovis, Novartis, Lilly, GSK, Karyopharm, Faeth, iTeos, Genentech, Mereo and Takeda and is supported in part by the National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA008748; MRM reports advisory board participation and honoraria from AstraZeneca, BIOCAD, GSK, Karyopharm, Merck, Roche and Zai Lab, speaker honoraria from AstraZeneca and GSK, stocks/shares and member of board of directors from Kar- yopharm, institutional research grants from Apexigen, AstraZeneca, GSK, Ultimovacs and Deciphera and trial chair for Deciphera; JAL has received honoraria for lectures and advisory boards from AstraZeneca, Tesaro Bio/GSK and Eisai; honoraria for lectures from Clovis Oncology and Neopharm; for advisory boards from Artios Pharma, MSD/ Merck, BMS, VBL Therapeutics and Nuvation, compensation from Regeneron and institutional research grants from AstraZeneca MSD/Merck, non-remunerated work in clinical trials for MSD, Clovis Oncology, Pfizer, GSK/Tesaro Bio and AstraZeneca and is past vice President for the European Society of Gynaecological Oncology; NC has received hon- oraria for lectures from AstraZeneca, Tesaro and Novartis, honoraria for advisory board from Roche, PharmaMar, AstraZeneca, MSD, Merck, Clovis Oncology, Tesaro, GSK, Pfizer, Takeda, BIOCAD, ImmunoGen, Mersana and Eisai and has received research grant from AstraZeneca, PharmaMar and Roche.

REFERENCES
1.	Morice P, Leary A, Creutzberg C, et al. Endometrial cancer. Lancet. 2016;387(10023):1094-1108.
2.	Ferlay J, Colombet M, Soerjomataram I, et al. Estimating the global cancer incidence and mortality in 2018: GLOBOCAN sources and methods. Int J Cancer. 2019;144(8):1941-1953.
3.	Bray F, Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, et al. Global cancer statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2018;68(6):394-424.
4.	Arthur RS, Kabat GC, Kim MY, et al. Metabolic syndrome and risk of endometrial cancer in postmenopausal women: a prospective study. Cancer Causes Control. 2019;30(4):355-363.
5.	 
Friberg E, Orsini N, Mantzoros CS, et al. Diabetes mellitus and risk of endometrial cancer: a meta-analysis. Diabetologia. 2007;50(7):1365- 1374.
6.	Lauby-Secretan B, Scoccianti C, Loomis D, et al. Body Fatness and Cancer–Viewpoint of the IARC Working Group. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(8):794-798.
7.	Rahib L, Smith BD, Aizenberg R, et al. Projecting cancer incidence and deaths to 2030: the unexpected burden of thyroid, liver, and pancreas cancers in the United States. Cancer Res. 2014;74(11):2913-2921.
8.	Bokhman JV. Two pathogenetic types of endometrial carcinoma.
Gynecol Oncol. 1983;15(1):10-17.
9.	Cancer Genome Atlas Research N, Kandoth C, Schultz N, et al. Inte- grated genomic characterization of endometrial carcinoma. Nature. 2013;497(7447):67-73.
10.	Domchek SM, Robson ME. Update on genetic testing in gynecologic cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(27):2501-2509.
11.	Soslow RA, Tornos C, Park KJ, et al. Endometrial carcinoma diagnosis: Use of FIGO grading and genomic subcategories in clinical practice: Recommendations of the International Society of Gynecological Pa- thologists. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2019;38(suppl 1):S64-S74.
12.	Bosse T, Peters EE, Creutzberg CL, et al. Substantial lymph-vascular space invasion (LVSI) is a significant risk factor for recurrence in endometrial cancer–A pooled analysis of PORTEC 1 and 2 trials. Eur J Cancer. 2015;51(13):1742-1750.
13.	Peters EEM, Leon-Castillo A, Smit V, et al. Defining substantial lym- phovascular space invasion in endometrial cancer. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2022;41:220-226.
14.	Peters EEM, Leon-Castillo A, Hogdall E, et al. Substantial lympho- vascular space invasion is an adverse prognostic factor in high-risk endometrial cancer. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2022;41(3):227-234.
15.	Zeimet AG, Reimer D, Huszar M, et al. L1CAM in early-stage type I endometrial cancer: results of a large multicenter evaluation. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013;105(15):1142-1150.
16.	Bosse T, Nout RA, Stelloo E, et al. L1 cell adhesion molecule is a strong predictor for distant recurrence and overall survival in early stage endometrial cancer: pooled PORTEC trial results. Eur J Cancer. 2014;50(15):2602-2610.
17.	Van Gool IC, Stelloo E, Nout RA, et al. Prognostic significance of L1CAM expression and its association with mutant p53 expression in high-risk endometrial cancer. Mod Pathol. 2016;29(2):174-181.
18.	Stelloo E, Nout RA, Osse EM, et al. Improved risk assessment by integrating molecular and clinicopathological factors in early-stage endometrial cancer-combined analysis of the PORTEC cohorts. Clin Cancer Res. 2016;22(16):4215-4224.
19.	Gilks CB, Oliva E, Soslow RA. Poor interobserver reproducibility in the diagnosis of high-grade endometrial carcinoma. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013;37(6):874-881.
20.	de Boer SM, Wortman BG, Bosse T, et al. Clinical consequences of upfront pathology review in the randomised PORTEC-3 trial for high- risk endometrial cancer. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(2):424-430.
21.	Kommoss S, McConechy MK, Kommoss F, et al. Final validation of the ProMisE molecular classifier for endometrial carcinoma in a large population-based case series. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(5):1180-1188.
22.	Talhouk A, McConechy MK, Leung S, et al. A clinically applicable molecular-based classification for endometrial cancers. Br J Cancer. 2015;113(2):299-310.
23.	Leon-Castillo A, de Boer SM, Powell ME, et al. Molecular classification of the PORTEC-3 trial for high-risk endometrial cancer: impact on prognosis and benefit from adjuvant therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(29):3388-3397.
24.	Vermij L, Smit V, Nout R, et al. Incorporation of molecular charac- teristics into endometrial cancer management. Histopathology. 2020;76(1):52-63.
25.	Leon-Castillo A, Britton H, McConechy MK, et al. Interpretation of somatic POLE mutations in endometrial carcinoma. J Pathol. 2020;250(3):323-335.
26.	Stelloo E, Jansen AML, Osse EM, et al. Practical guidance for mismatch repair-deficiency testing in endometrial cancer. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(1):96-102.
 
A. Oaknin et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
27.	Singh N, Piskorz AM, Bosse T, et al. p53 immunohistochemistry is an accurate surrogate for TP53 mutational analysis in endometrial car- cinoma biopsies. J Pathol. 2020;250(3):336-345.
28.	van den Heerik A, Horeweg N, Nout RA, et al. PORTEC-4a: interna- tional randomized trial of molecular profile-based adjuvant treatment for women with high-intermediate risk endometrial cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2020;30(12):2002-2007.
29.	Espinosa I, De Leo A, D’Angelo E, et al. Dedifferentiated endometrial carcinomas with neuroendocrine features: a clinicopathologic, immu- nohistochemical, and molecular genetic study. Hum Pathol. 2018;72: 100-106.
30.	Kim SR, Cloutier BT, Leung S, et al. Molecular subtypes of clear cell carcinoma of the endometrium: Opportunities for prognostic and predictive stratification. Gynecol Oncol. 2020;158(1):3-11.
31.	Peungjesada S, Bhosale PR, Balachandran A, et al. Magnetic reso- nance imaging of endometrial carcinoma. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 2009;33(4):601-608.
32.	Gee MS, Atri M, Bandos AI, et al. Identification of distant metastatic disease in uterine cervical and endometrial cancers with FDG PET/CT: analysis from the ACRIN 6671/GOG 0233 multicenter trial. Radiology. 2018;287(1):176-184.
33.	Bollineni VR, Ytre-Hauge S, Bollineni-Balabay O, et al. High diagnostic value of 18F-FDG PET/CT in endometrial cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature. J Nucl Med. 2016;57(6):879-885.
34.	Janda M, Gebski V, Davies LC, et al. Effect of total laparoscopic hys- terectomy vs total abdominal hysterectomy on disease-free survival among women with stage I endometrial cancer: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2017;317(12):1224-1233.
35.	Walker JL, Piedmonte MR, Spirtos NM, et al. Recurrence and survival after random assignment to laparoscopy versus laparotomy for comprehensive surgical staging of uterine cancer: Gynecologic Oncology Group LAP2 Study. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(7):695-700.
36.	Katsoulakis E, Mattes MD, Rineer JM, et al. Contemporary analysis of pelvic and para-aortic metastasis in endometrial cancer using the SEER registry. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2014;127(3):293-296.
37.	Benedetti Panici P, Basile S, Maneschi F, et al. Systematic pelvic lymphadenectomy vs. no lymphadenectomy in early-stage endome- trial carcinoma: randomized clinical trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008;100(23):1707-1716.
38.	ASTEC study group; Kitchener H, Swart AM, Qian Q, et al. Efficacy of systematic pelvic lymphadenectomy in endometrial cancer (MRC ASTEC trial): a randomised study. Lancet. 2009;373(9658):125-136.
39.	Bogani G, Murgia F, Ditto A, et al. Sentinel node mapping vs. lym- phadenectomy in endometrial cancer: A systematic review and meta- analysis. Gynecol Oncol. 2019;153(3):676-683.
40.	How JA, O’Farrell P, Amajoud Z, et al. Sentinel lymph node mapping in endometrial cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Minerva Ginecol. 2018;70(2):194-214.
41.	Rossi EC, Kowalski LD, Scalici J, et al. A comparison of sentinel lymph node biopsy to lymphadenectomy for endometrial cancer staging (FIRES trial): a multicentre, prospective, cohort study. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(3):384-392.
42.	Shih KK, Yun E, Gardner GJ, et al. Surgical cytoreduction in stage IV endometrioid endometrial carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol. 2011;122(3): 608-611.
43.	Rauh L, Staples JN, Duska LR. Chemotherapy alone may have equiv- alent survival as compared to suboptimal surgery in advanced endometrial cancer patients. Gynecol Oncol Rep. 2020;32:100535.
44.	Stalberg K, Bjurberg M, Borgfeldt C, et al. Lymphovascular space in- vasion as a predictive factor for lymph node metastases and survival in endometrioid endometrial cancer - a Swedish Gynecologic Cancer Group (SweGCG) study. Acta Oncol. 2019;58(11):1628-1633.
45.	Talhouk A, McConechy MK, Leung S, et al. Confirmation of ProMisE: a simple, genomics-based clinical classifier for endometrial cancer. Cancer. 2017;123(5):802-813.
46.	Church DN, Stelloo E, Nout RA, et al. Prognostic significance of POLE proofreading mutations in endometrial cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015;107(1):402.
47.	 
Creutzberg CL, van Putten WL, Koper PC, et al. Surgery and post- operative radiotherapy versus surgery alone for patients with stage-1 endometrial carcinoma: multicentre randomised trial. PORTEC Study Group. Post Operative Radiation Therapy in Endometrial Carcinoma. Lancet. 2000;355(9213):1404-1411.
48.	Keys HM, Roberts JA, Brunetto VL, et al. A phase III trial of surgery with or without adjunctive external pelvic radiation therapy in in- termediate risk endometrial adenocarcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol. 2004;92(3):744-751.
49.	Group AES, Blake P, Swart AM, et al. Adjuvant external beam radiotherapy in the treatment of endometrial cancer (MRC ASTEC and NCIC CTG EN.5 randomised trials): pooled trial results, systematic review, and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2009;373(9658):137- 146.
50.	Bosse T, Nout RA, McAlpine JN, et al. Molecular classification of grade
3 endometrioid endometrial cancers identifies distinct prognostic subgroups. Am J Surg Pathol. 2018;42(5):561-568.
51.	van Gool IC, Eggink FA, Freeman-Mills L, et al. POLE proofreading mutations elicit an antitumor immune response in endometrial cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;21(14):3347-3355.
52.	Creutzberg CL, Lu KH, Fleming GF. Uterine cancer: adjuvant therapy and management of metastatic disease. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(27): 2490-2500.
53.	Sorbe BG, Horvath G, Andersson H, et al. External pelvic and vaginal irradiation versus vaginal irradiation alone as postoperative therapy in medium-risk endometrial carcinoma: a prospective, randomized study–quality-of-life analysis. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2012;22(7):1281- 1288.
54.	Nout RA, Smit VT, Putter H, et al. Vaginal brachytherapy versus pelvic external beam radiotherapy for patients with endometrial cancer of high-intermediate risk (PORTEC-2): an open-label, non-inferiority, randomised trial. Lancet. 2010;375(9717):816-823.
55.	Wortman BG, Creutzberg CL, Putter H, et al. Ten-year results of the PORTEC-2 trial for high-intermediate risk endometrial carcinoma: improving patient selection for adjuvant therapy. Br J Cancer. 2018;119(9):1067-1074.
56.	Ortoft G, Hansen ES, Bertelsen K. Omitting adjuvant radiotherapy in endometrial cancer increases the rate of locoregional recurrences but has no effect on long-term survival: the Danish Endometrial Cancer Study. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2013;23(8):1429-1437.
57.	Maggi R, Lissoni A, Spina F, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy vs radio- therapy in high-risk endometrial carcinoma: results of a randomised trial. Br J Cancer. 2006;95(3):266-271.
58.	Susumu N, Sagae S, Udagawa Y, et al. Randomized phase III trial of pelvic radiotherapy versus cisplatin-based combined chemotherapy in patients with intermediate- and high-risk endometrial cancer: a Japanese Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol. 2008;108(1):226-233.
59.	Hogberg T, Signorelli M, de Oliveira CF, et al. Sequential adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy in endometrial cancer–results from two randomised studies. Eur J Cancer. 2010;46(13):2422-2431.
60.	Randall ME, Filiaci V, McMeekin DS, et al. Phase III trial: adjuvant pelvic radiation therapy versus vaginal brachytherapy plus paclitaxel/ carboplatin in high-intermediate and high-risk early stage endome- trial cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(21):1810-1818.
61.	de Boer SM, Powell ME, Mileshkin L, et al. Adjuvant chemo- radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone in women with high-risk endometrial cancer (PORTEC-3): patterns of recurrence and post- hoc survival analysis of a randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2019;20(9):1273-1285.
62.	de Boer SM, Powell ME, Mileshkin L, et al. Adjuvant chemo- radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone for women with high-risk endometrial cancer (PORTEC-3): final results of an international, open-label, multicentre, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2018;19(3):295-309.
63.	Matei D, Filiaci V, Randall ME, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy plus radiation for locally advanced endometrial cancer. N Engl J Med. 2019;380(24):2317-2326.
 
Annals of Oncology	A. Oaknin et al.

 
64.	Cherniack AD, Shen H, Walter V, et al. Integrated molecular charac- terization of uterine carcinosarcoma. Cancer Cell. 2017;31(3):411- 423.
65.	Creasman WT, Odicino F, Maisonneuve P, et al. Carcinoma of the corpus uteri. FIGO 26th Annual Report on the Results of Treatment in Gynecological Cancer. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2006;95(suppl 1):S105- S143.
66.	Hoekstra CJ, Koper PC, van Putten WL. Recurrent endometrial adenocarcinoma after surgery alone: prognostic factors and treat- ment. Radiother Oncol. 1993;27(2):164-166.
67.	Campagnutta E, Giorda G, De Piero G, et al. Surgical treatment of recurrent endometrial carcinoma. Cancer. 2004;100(1):89-96.
68.	Creutzberg CL, van Putten WL, Koper PC, et al. Survival after relapse in patients with endometrial cancer: results from a randomized trial. Gynecol Oncol. 2003;89(2):201-209.
69.	Sears JD, Greven KM, Hoen HM, et al. Prognostic factors and treat- ment outcome for patients with locally recurrent endometrial cancer. Cancer. 1994;74(4):1303-1308.
70.	Mundt AJ, McBride R, Rotmensch J, et al. Significant pelvic recurrence in high-risk pathologic stage I–IV endometrial carcinoma patients after adjuvant chemotherapy alone: implications for adjuvant radia- tion therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2001;50(5):1145-1153.
71.	Jereczek-Fossa B, Badzio A, Jassem J. Recurrent endometrial cancer after surgery alone: results of salvage radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;48(2):405-413.
72.	Chapman CH, Maghsoudi K, Littell RD, et al. Salvage high-dose-rate brachytherapy and external beam radiotherapy for isolated vaginal recurrences of endometrial cancer with no prior adjuvant therapy. Brachytherapy. 2017;16(6):1152-1158.
73.	Jhingran A, Burke TW, Eifel PJ. Definitive radiotherapy for patients with isolated vaginal recurrence of endometrial carcinoma after hysterectomy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;56(5):366-1372.
74.	Hardarson HA, Heidemann LN, dePont Christensen R, et al. Vaginal vault recurrences of endometrial cancer in non-irradiated patients - Radiotherapy or surgery. Gynecol Oncol Rep. 2015;11:26-30.
75.	Shikama A, Minaguchi T, Takao W, et al. Predictors of favorable sur- vival after secondary cytoreductive surgery for recurrent endometrial cancer. Int J Clin Oncol. 2019;24(10):1256-1263.
76.	Chiantera V, Rossi M, De Iaco P, et al. Pelvic exenteration for recurrent endometrial adenocarcinoma: a retrospective multi- institutional study about 21 patients. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2014;24(5):880-884.
77.	Turan T, Tasci T, Karalok A, et al. Salvage cytoreductive surgery for recurrent endometrial cancer. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2015;25(9):1623- 1632.
78.	Lodeweges JE, Klinkenberg TJ, Ubbels JF, et al. Long-term outcome of surgery or   stereotactic   radiotherapy   for   lung   oligometastases. J Thorac Oncol. 2017;12(9):1442-1445.
79.	Miller DS, Filiaci VL, Mannel RS, et al. Carboplatin and paclitaxel for advanced endometrial cancer: final overall survival and adverse event analysis of a phase III trial (NRG Oncology/GOG0209). J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(33):3841-3850.
80.	Lorusso D, Ferrandina G, Colombo N, et al. Carboplatin-paclitaxel compared to Carboplatin-Paclitaxel-Bevacizumab in advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer: MITO END-2 - A randomized phase II trial. Gynecol Oncol. 2019;155(3):406-412.
81.	Pectasides D, Pectasides E, Economopoulos T. Systemic therapy in metastatic or recurrent endometrial cancer. Cancer Treat Rev. 2007;33(2):177-190.
82.	Dellinger TH, Monk BJ. Systemic therapy for recurrent endometrial cancer: a review of North American trials. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2009;9(7):905-916.
83.	McMeekin S, Dizon D, Barter J, et al. Phase III randomized trial of second-line ixabepilone versus paclitaxel or doxorubicin in women with advanced endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2015;138(1):18- 23.
84.	Rubinstein M, Halpenny D, Makker V, et al. Retreatment with car- boplatin and paclitaxel for recurrent endometrial cancer: A
 
retrospective study of the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center experience. Gynecol Oncol Rep. 2019;28:120-123.
85.	Nagao S, Nishio S, Michimae H, et al. Applicability of the concept of “platinum sensitivity” to recurrent endometrial cancer: the SGSG- 012/GOTIC-004/Intergroup study. Gynecol Oncol. 2013;131(3):567- 573.
86.	Singh M, Zaino RJ, Filiaci VJ, et al. Relationship of estrogen and progesterone receptors to clinical outcome in metastatic endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. Gynecol Oncol. 2007;106(2):325-333.
87.	Ethier JL, Desautels DN, Amir E, et al. Is hormonal therapy effective in advanced endometrial cancer? A systematic review and meta-anal- ysis. Gynecol Oncol. 2017;147(1):158-166.
88.	Mileshkin L, Edmondson R, O’Connell RL, et al. Phase 2 study of anastrozole in recurrent estrogen (ER)/progesterone (PR) positive endometrial cancer: The PARAGON trial - ANZGOG 0903. Gynecol Oncol. 2019;154(1):29-37.
89.	Marabelle A, Fakih M, Lopez J, et al. Association of tumour muta- tional burden with outcomes in patients with advanced solid tumours treated with pembrolizumab: prospective biomarker analysis of the multicohort, open-label, phase 2 KEYNOTE-158 study. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(10):1353-1365.
90.	Konstantinopoulos PA, Luo W, Liu JF, et al. Phase II study of avelumab in patients with mismatch repair deficient and mismatch repair proficient recurrent/persistent endometrial cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(30):2786-2794.
91.	Antill Y, Kok PS, Stockler MR, et al. Updated results of activity of durvalumab in advanced endometrial cancer (AEC) according to mismatch repair (MMR) status: the phase II PHAEDRA trial (ANZ- GOG1601). Ann Oncol. 2019;30:ix192.
92.	Oaknin A, Tinker AV, Gilbert L, et al. Clinical activity and safety of the anti-programmed death 1 monoclonal antibody dostarlimab for pa- tients with recurrent or advanced mismatch repair-deficient endo- metrial cancer: a nonrandomized phase 1 clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2020;6(11):1766-1772.
93.	Liu JF, Gordon M, Veneris J, et al. Safety, clinical activity and biomarker assessments of atezolizumab from a Phase I study in advanced/recurrent ovarian and uterine cancers. Gynecol Oncol. 2019;154(2):314-322.
94.	Makker V, Taylor MH, Aghajanian C, et al. Lenvatinib plus pem- brolizumab in patients with advanced endometrial cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(26):2981-2992.
95.	Makker V, Colombo N, Casado Herraez A, et al. Lenvatinib plus pembrolizumab for advanced endometrial cancer. N Engl J Med. 2022;386:437-448.
96.	Results Merck. From Pivotal Phase 3 KEYNOTE-775/Study 309 Trial of KEYTRUDA® (pembrolizumab) Plus LENVIMA® (lenvatinib) in Advanced Endometrial Carcinoma Published in the. New England Journal of Medicine. 2022.
97.	Finn RS, Boer K, Bondarenko I, et al. Overall survival results from the randomized phase 2 study of palbociclib in combination with letro- zole versus letrozole alone for first-line treatment of ER /HER2- advanced breast cancer (PALOMA-1, TRIO-18). Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2020;183(2):419-428.
98.	Mirza MR, Bjørge L, Marmé F, et al. LBA28 A randomised double- blind placebo-controlled phase II trial of palbociclib combined with letrozole (L) in patients (pts) with oestrogen receptor-positive (ER ) advanced/recurrent endometrial cancer (EC): NSGO-PALEO/ENGOT- EN3 trial. Ann Oncol. 2020;31:S1160.
99.	Bauer TM, Patel MR, Infante JR. Targeting PI3 kinase in cancer.
Pharmacol Ther. 2015;146:53-60.
100.	Slomovitz BM, Jiang Y, Yates MS, et al. Phase II study of everolimus and letrozole in patients with recurrent endometrial carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(8):930-936.
101.	Aghajanian C, Filiaci V, Dizon DS, et al. A phase II study of frontline paclitaxel/carboplatin/bevacizumab, paclitaxel/carboplatin/temsir- olimus, or ixabepilone/carboplatin/bevacizumab in advanced/recur- rent endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2018;150(2):274-281.
 
A. Oaknin et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
102.	Diver EJ, Foster R, Rueda BR, et al. The therapeutic challenge of targeting HER2 in endometrial cancer. Oncologist. 2015;20(9):1058- 1068.
103.	Vermij L, Horeweg N, Leon-Castillo A, et al. HER2 status in high-risk endometrial cancers (PORTEC-3): relationship with histotype, mo- lecular classification, and clinical outcomes. Cancers (Basel). 2020;13(1):44.
104.	Fader AN, Roque DM, Siegel E, et al. Randomized phase II trial of carboplatin-paclitaxel versus carboplatin-paclitaxel-trastuzumab in uterine serous carcinomas that overexpress human epidermal growth factor receptor 2/neu. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(20):2044- 2051.
105.	Liu JF, Xiong N, Campos SM, et al. Phase II study of the WEE1 inhibitor adavosertib in recurrent uterine serous carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(14):1531-1539.
106.	Sartori E, Laface B, Gadducci A, et al. Factors inﬂuencing survival in endometrial cancer relapsing patients: a Cooperation Task Force (CTF) study. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2003;13(4):458-465.
107.	Gadducci A, Cosio S, Fanucchi A, et al. An intensive follow-up does not change survival of patients with clinical stage I endometrial cancer. Anticancer Res. 2000;20(3B):1977-1984.
108.	Jefford M, Rowland J, Grunfeld E, et al. Implementing improved post-treatment care for cancer survivors in England, with re- ﬂections from Australia, Canada and the USA. Br J Cancer. 2013;108(1):14-20.
109.	Leeson SC, Beaver K, Ezendam NPM, et al. The future for follow-up of gynaecological cancer in Europe. Summary of available data and overview of ongoing trials. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2017;210:376-380.
110.	Beaver K, Williamson S, Sutton C, et al. Comparing hospital and telephone follow-up for patients treated for stage-I endometrial
 
cancer (ENDCAT trial): a randomised, multicentre, non-inferiority trial. BJOG. 2017;124(1):150-160.
111.	Kadkhodayan S, Shahriari S, Treglia G, et al. Accuracy of 18-F-FDG PET imaging in the follow up of endometrial cancer patients: systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature. Gynecol Oncol. 2013;128(2):397-404.
112.	Soisson S, Ganz PA, Gaffney D, et al. Long-term cardiovascular out- comes among endometrial cancer survivors in a large, population- based cohort study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2018;110(12):1342-1351.
113.	Shisler R, Sinnott JA, Wang V, et al. Life after endometrial cancer: a systematic review of patient-reported outcomes. Gynecol Oncol. 2018;148(2):403-413.
114.	Beesley VL, Alemayehu C, Webb PM. A systematic literature review of trials ofsurvivorship interventions for women with gynaecological cancer and their caregivers. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2019;28(3):e13057.
115.	Edey KA, Rundle S, Hickey M. Hormone replacement therapy for women previously treated for endometrial cancer. Cochrane Data- base Syst Rev. 2018;5:CD008830.
116.	Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J, et al. ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(10):2340-2366.
117.	Dykewicz CA. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (U.S.); In- fectious Diseases Society of America; American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144.
118.	Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18(3):421.
119.	McAlpine J, Leon-Castillo A, Bosse T. The rise of a novel classification system for endometrial carcinoma; integration of molecular sub- classes. J Pathol. 2018;244(5):538-549.
