




 SPECIAL ARTICLE	

Gastric cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up5
F. Lordick1, F. Carneiro2,3,4, S. Cascinu5, T. Fleitas6, K. Haustermans7, G. Piessen8,9,10,11, A. Vogel12 & E. C. Smyth13, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Medicine II (Oncology, Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Pulmonology and Infectious Diseases), University Cancer Center Leipzig (UCCL), University Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany; 2Department of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João (CHUSJ), Porto; 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto (FMUP), Porto; 4Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S)/Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto (Ipatimup), Porto, Portugal; 5Department of Medical Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Università Vita-Salute, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy; 6Department of Medical Oncology, INCLIVA Biomedical Research Institute, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain; 7Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 8University of Lille, UMR9020-U1277 - CANTHER - Cancer Heterogeneity Plasticity and Resistance to Therapies, Lille; 9CNRS, UMR9020, Lille; 10Inserm, U1277, Lille; 11CHU Lille, Department of Digestive and Oncological Surgery, Lille, France; 12Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany; 13Department of Oncology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK

Available online 29 July 2022



 

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
More than 1 million (1 089 103) new cases of gastric cancer were estimated globally in 2020, resulting in 768 793 deaths.1 These burden estimates will continue to increase due to the ageing population and growth of high-risk groups. Of these global numbers, an estimated 136 038 cases and 96 997 deaths occurred in Europe.1 Gastric cancer displays sub- stantial global variation in incidence; the highest rates are observed in Eastern Asia, Central and Eastern Europe and South America.1 A gradual decline in the incidence of gastric cancer has been observed in Western Europe and North America over the past 60 years, and more recent declines in high-risk countries have also become apparent.2 This is epidemiologically distinct from the relative increase in oesophageal adenocarcinoma, including tumours of the oesophagogastric junction (OGJ), which are discussed in a separate guideline document.
Incidence in men is twice as high as in women. Risk factors vary by anatomical subsite of disease; non-cardia gastric cancer, which is more common in East Asia and Latin America, represents w80% of gastric tumours globally and has been associated with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection, alcohol use, high salt intake and low consumption


*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: September 2016, last update July 2022. This publication supersedes the previously published ver- siondAnn Oncol 2016;27(suppl 5):v38-v49.
0923-7534/© 2022 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 

of fruit and vegetables. Proximal (cardia) gastric cancer is associated with obesity and gastro-oesophageal reﬂux and is more common in North America and Western Europe.3 Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive gastric cancer is more prevalent in the fundus or body (62%) and its prevalence seems to be similar in Asia, Europe and the Americas.4
Recent studies report an increase in non-cardia gastric cancer among young individuals (<50 years), especially in low-incidence countries such as the UK and US e pop- ulations with a low prevalence of H. pylori infection. Dys- biosis of the gastric microbiome associated with modern
lifestyles and an increase in autoimmune disorders in this age group have been postulated as potential explanations.5

Genetic predisposition
Gastric cancer demonstrates familial aggregation in w10% of cases, and an inherited genetic predisposition is identi- fied in up to 3% of cases.6 Genetic tumour risk syndromes are characterised by an increased risk of early-onset cancers in a familial context. High cancer risk is mostly driven by loss-of-function variants in a single cancer-associated gene. CDH1 and CTNNA1 germline variants predispose to hered- itary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC), while APC promoter 1B single nucleotide variants predispose to gastric adeno- carcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS). Familial intestinal gastric cancer (FIGC), recognised as a gastric cancer-predisposing disease, remains understudied and genetically unsolved.7 Gastric cancer can also occur within the spectrum of other genetic tumour risk syn- dromes, such as Lynch syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), LieFraumeni and PeutzeJeghers
 

 
syndromes (Table 1).6 HDGC is the most studied hereditary gastric cancer risk syndrome and is estimated to have a population incidence rate of w5-10/100 000 births.8 The incidence rates for other gastric cancer risk syndromes are less well defined. HDGC is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome that is characterised by a high prevalence of diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. HDGC is caused by CDH1/E-cadherin germline single nucleotide variants and copy number variants, classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology CDH1 variant curation guidelines.9 Pathogenic variants in CTNNA1 occur in a minority of families with HDGC. The International Gastric Cancer Link- age Consortium provides updated practice guidelines for HDGC, recognising the emerging evidence of variability in gastric cancer risk between families, the growing capability of endoscopic and histological surveillance in HDGC and greater experience managing long-term sequelae following total gastrectomy in young patients.8


Prevention
There is consistent evidence that eradication of H. pylori substantially reduces the incidence of gastric cancer in healthy individuals, patients with gastric atrophy and peo- ple with a family history of gastric cancer.10,11 Non-cardia intestinal-type cancerdthe most common histological subtype of gastric cancerdfollows a pattern of stepwise progression (known as the Correa Cascade) from normal mucosa to non-atrophic gastritis, atrophic gastritis with or without intestinal metaplasia (IM), dysplasia and finally cancer.12 In high-risk East Asian countries (China, Japan and South Korea), population- and endoscopy-based screening programmes have been implemented.13-15 These pro- grammes have resulted in higher detection rates of early- stage gastric cancer, with substantially reduced mortality. In contrast, population-based endoscopic screening of asymptomatic individuals is not recommended in low inci- dence countries.16,17 Since individuals with IM have an increased risk of gastric cancer, multidisciplinary European and UK endoscopy guidelines recommend that patients with IM as well as a family history of gastric cancer, incomplete-type IM or persistent H. pylori-associated


Table 1. Gene mutations gastric cancer6
associated	with	inherited predisposition to
Gene mutation	Associated syndrome
APC	FAP
APC promoter 1B	GAPPS
CDH1, CTNNA1	HDGC
MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2	Lynch syndrome
SMAD4, BMPR1A	Juvenile polyposis syndrome
STK11	PeutzeJeghers syndrome
TP53	LieFraumeni syndrome
FAP, familial adenomatous polyposis; GAPPS, gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach; HDGC, hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.
Adapted with permission.6
 
gastritis should undergo endoscopic surveillance with guided biopsies every 3 years.

Recommendations
If a familial cancer syndrome is suspected, referral to a geneticist for assessment is recommended [V, A].
Population-based endoscopic screening of asymptomatic individuals is only recommended in regions with a very high incidence of gastric cancer [V, B].


DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Diagnosis
Gastric cancer is often asymptomatic in the early stages. In advanced disease, common signs and symptoms include dysphagia, asthenia, indigestion, vomiting, weight loss, early satiety and/or iron deficiency anaemia. In many cases, however, these non-specific symptoms do not lead to urgent investigations. Overall, w60% of people with gastric cancer are not eligible for curative treatment owing to late presentation or comorbidities.18
Endoscopic examination and forceps biopsies are the gold standard method for diagnosing gastric cancer. Multiple (5- 8) biopsies should be carried out to provide adequately sized material for histological and molecular interpretation, especially in the setting of ulcerated lesions.19,20 Details of the mucosal surface can be evaluated by narrow-band imaging or chromoendoscopy in combination with magni- fying endoscopy. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) is also a helpful tool to identify infiltrated regions of the gastric wall.21 Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) and endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) may also be used for diagnosis. Both procedures can deliver reliable staging information and can also be used to treat superficial lesions such as dysplasia or intramucosal carcinoma.22

Pathology
Approximately 90% of gastric cancers are adenocarcinomas (ACs). This Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) does not apply to rarer gastric malignancies such as gastrointestinal stromal tumours, lymphomas and neuroendocrine tumours.
Based on macroscopic features, early gastric carcinomas are sub-classified into three main types according to the Endoscopic Classification Review Group (Paris classifica- tion): 0-I (protruded); 0-II (superficial); and 0-III (exca- vated).23 Locally advanced gastric carcinomas are macroscopically sub-classified according to the Borrmann classification as polypoid/fungating without ulceration (type I), ulcerated with elevated borders and sharp margins (type
II), ulcerated with diffuse infiltration at the base (type III) and diffusely infiltrative with thickening of the wall (type IV).24
There are several gastric cancer histopathological class- ification schemes. The most commonly used are the World Health Organization (WHO)25 and Japanese Gastric Cancer Association26 classifications, which are very similar, as well
 

 
as those proposed by Nakamura and colleagues27 and Laurén, the latter of which recognises three main subtypes: intestinal, diffuse and mixed.28 The WHO classification is widely used in Western countries and recognises five main histological subtypes: tubular, papillary, poorly cohesive (including signet ring cell and other subtypes), mucinous and mixed ACs.

Molecular biology
The recently identified molecular profiles of gastric cancer are important for better understanding gastric cancer sub- types and may also be useful for identifying clinically rele- vant biomarkers and new therapeutic targets. Intratumoural and intertumoural heterogeneity is a feature of gastric carcinoma which leads to diagnostic and therapeutic challenges.
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) research network identified four molecularly distinct gastric cancer subtypes: EBV positive, microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H), genomically stable (GS) and tumours with chromosomal instability (CIN).4 Each subtype is enriched for selected molecular abnormalities, with some overlap. The CIN sub- type is enriched for copy number changes in key receptor tyrosine kinase oncogenes such as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) and MET. Other genomic classifications, such as the Asian Can- cer Research Group subtyping, show some overlap with TCGA classification.29
Based on positive phase III trial data, HER2 status and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) combined positive score (CPS) should be evaluated in patients with metastatic gastric cancer to tailor first-line treatment in combination with chemotherapy (ChT) [see the table of ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets (ESCAT) scores for further details, Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004].30,31 Pa- tients with HER2-overexpressing gastric cancer [HER2 immunohistochemistry (IHC) score 3 or HER2 IHC 2 and FISH positive] benefit from treatment with the anti-HER2 antibody trastuzumab in addition to standard platinume ﬂuoropyrimidine ChT.30,32 The prevalence of HER2 over- expression is 10%-20%, with higher prevalence in proximal/ OGJ cancers and in the intestinal subtype according to Laurén.30,32,33 Efficacy of HER2-targeted treatment is hampered by the intratumoural heterogeneity of HER2 expression. Therefore, quantitative reporting of the pro- portion of tumour cells staining positive for HER2 by IHC and the gene amplification ratio (if in situ hybridisation was carried out, especially in IHC 2 patients) have been suggested.33
Emerging data from clinical trials suggest that immuno-
therapies such as programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) inhibitors demonstrate efficacy in gastric cancer. Evaluation of PD-L1 expression in patients with gastric cancer using CPS has been proposed, where a cut-off ≥1 would indicate positive PD-L1 expression; the prevalence of PD-L1 CPS ≥1
 
tumours is between 50% and 60%.34,35 A CPS cut-off	5 represents a validated threshold for overall survival (OS) benefit of nivolumab given in addition to standard platinumeﬂuoropyrimidine first-line ChT.31 Different anti- bodies for staining of PD-L1 in gastric cancer are used. In a recent study, PD-L1 22C3 and 28-8 pharmDx assays, both tested on the same platform (hardware), were highly comparable at CPS cut-offs of 1, 10 and 50, providing evi- dence for the potential interchangeability of the two PD-L1 assays in gastric cancer.36 These results, however, were not confirmed in another study, which suggested that scoring PD-L1 CPS with the 28-8 assay may result in higher PD-L1 scores and a higher proportion of PD-L1 positivity compared with the 22C3 and other assays. Until stronger evidence of inter-assay concordance is found, caution should be taken when treating the assays as equivalent.37 MSI-H/mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) are associ- ated with better prognosis in localised stages of gastric cancer.38 There is an ongoing debate on whether micro- satellite instability (MSI)/mismatch repair (MMR) status should be used in order to tailor peri-operative ChT.39,40 As MSI-H/dMMR are associated with a high response rate and improved benefit from immunotherapy compared with ChT in stage IV gastric cancer,41 MSI/MMR status should be assessed for patients with locally advanced and unresect- able or metastatic gastric cancer to tailor treatment
accordingly.32
Other molecular markers, such as FGFR2 amplification/ overexpression, MET amplification, claudin-18.2 over- expression and EBV,32 are being investigated and their validation as predictive biomarkers in randomised controlled trials (RCTs) is awaited.

Recommendations
Diagnosis should be made from multiple (5-8) endo- scopic biopsies to guarantee an adequate representation of the tumour [IV, B].
The histological diagnosis should be reported according to WHO criteria [V, B].
HER2 expression by IHC and/or amplification by in situ hybridisation [I, A; ESCAT score: I-A], PD-L1 by IHC ac- cording to CPS [I, A] and MSI-H/dMMR [II, A; ESCAT score: I-B] are validated predictive biomarkers for drug therapy.


STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Careful tumour staging is essential to ensure patients are appropriately selected for treatment interventions. The recommended initial staging investigations are detailed in Table 2.
The following characteristics are frequently demon- strated in malignant lymph nodes detected on computed tomography (CT)42:
●	Short axis diameter 6-8 mm in perigastric lymph nodes
●	Round shape
●	Central necrosis
 

 
●	Loss of the fatty hilum
 
benefit of gastrectomy for these patients has not been
50,51
 
●	Heterogeneous or high enhancement
 
established.
 
A retrospective analysis, however, indi-
 

Nevertheless, the sensitivity of CT for lymph node staging is variable (62.5%-91.9% on systematic review42) and global consensus is lacking on specific diagnostic criteria.
EUS is more sensitive for N staging compared with CT (91% versus 77%, respectively). Additionally, for T1 staging, the sensitivity for EUS (82%) is higher than that for multidetector CT (41%); however, both EUS and CT show limited specificity (49% and 63%, respectively).43 [18F]2-Fluoro-2-deoxy-D- glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)eCT imaging may improve staging by detecting involved lymph nodes or metastatic disease; however, FDGePET may not be informative in patients with mucinous or diffuse tumours due to lower tracer uptake.44 Therefore, FDGePETeCT is not routinely recommended for staging of gastric cancer.
Laparoscopy and peritoneal washings for malignant cells are recommended in all stage IB-III gastric cancers which are considered potentially resectable, to exclude radiologically and macroscopically occult peritoneal metastatic disease. The benefit is greater for patients with T3/T4 disease and poorly cohesive tumours.44 The accuracy for detection of peritoneal metastases is good, with overall sensitivity of 84.6% and specificity of 100%.45 Peritoneal metastases should be documented according to the Peritoneal Carci- nomatosis Index (PCI).46 A lower PCI score has been asso- ciated with better prognosis, and patients with limited peritoneal metastases might be appropriate candidates for cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal ChT (HIPEC); however, evidence is still limited and risks must be balanced carefully against uncertain benefits.47-49 The prognosis of patients with positive lavage cytology (CY ) without gross peritoneal dissemination is poor. The survival



Table 2. Diagnostic and staging investigations in gastric cancer.
Procedure	Purpose
FBC	Assess for iron deficiency anaemia
Renal and liver function     Assess renal and liver function to determine
appropriate therapeutic options
Endoscopy and biopsy	Obtain tissue for diagnosis, histological
classification and molecular biomarkers,
e.g. HER2 status
CT of thorax þ abdomen   Staging of tumour e to detect local/distant
  pelvis	lymphadenopathy and metastatic disease or
ascites
EUS	Accurate assessment of T and N stage in potentially operable tumours
Determine the proximal and distal extent of
tumour
Laparoscopy þ washings Exclude occult metastatic disease involving
peritoneum/diaphragm
PET, if available	May improve detection of occult metastatic
disease in some cases. Often negative in diffuse-
type gastric cancer
Assessment of nutritional May detect relevant dietary and nutritional status	deficiencies in both localised and advanced disease settings
CT, computed tomography; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; FBC, full blood count; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; N, node; PET, positron emission to- mography; T, tumour.
 
cated a better prognosis if CY	can be converted to negative lavage cytology during neoadjuvant ChT.52 The additional value of HIPEC needs to be established in ongoing clinical trials. Cases involving CY	should be dis- cussed in a multidisciplinary tumour board, weighing up the risks and potential benefit of surgery. Patients with CY peritoneal lavage should ideally be treated within a clinical trial.
Gastric cancer should be staged according to the Amer- ican Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)/Union for Interna- tional Cancer Control (UICC) TNM (tumourenodee metastasis) 8th edition staging manual (see Supplementary Tables S2 and S3, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j. annonc.2022.07.004).53,54
Patients should be tested for dihydropyrimidine dehy- drogenase enzyme deficiency before starting cancer treat- ment with 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) given by infusion, or with the related medicines capecitabine and tegafur.55

Recommendations
Initial staging and risk assessment should include phys- ical examination, full and differential blood count, liver and renal function tests, endoscopy and contrast- enhanced CT scan of the thorax, abdomen pelvis (Table 2) [V, A].
FDGePETeCT is not routinely recommended [III, C]. Diagnostic laparoscopy and peritoneal washings for cytology are recommended for patients with resectable gastric cancer who are also candidates for peri- operative ChT [III, B]. Patients with CY	are uncertain candidates for curatively-intended surgical resection.
The TNM stage should be recorded according to the 8th edition of the AJCC/UICC staging manual [IV, A].


MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL AND LOCOREGIONAL DISEASE
Multidisciplinary treatment planning before any treatment decision is mandatory. The core membership of the multi- disciplinary team should include surgeons, medical and radiation oncologists, gastroenterologists, radiologists and pathologists, with dieticians and nurse specialists if avail- able.18 A proposed algorithm for the treatment of localised gastric cancer is shown in Figure 1.

Resection
Surgical resection of operable gastric cancer is potentially curative; however, most patients relapse following resec- tion; therefore, combined modality therapies are standard for stage ≥IB disease.
Endoscopic resection. Endoscopic resection is recom- mended for very early gastric cancers (T1a) if they are clearly
(i) confined to the mucosa, (ii) well-differentiated G1-2, (iii)
2 cm and (iv) non-ulcerated.	Expanded endoscopic resection criteria concerning size, depth of submucosal
 

 
Figure 1. Treatment algorithm for localised gastric cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratification; red: surgery; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy. ChT, chemotherapy; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; R1, microscopic tumour at the margin; RT, radiotherapy.
aEndoscopic resection indicated if: (i) confined to mucosa; (ii) well-differentiated G1-2; (iii)    2 cm; (iv) non-ulcerated. Endoscopic resection to be considered if no more than two expanded criteria are met according to Pimentel-Nunes et al.56
bLymph node dissection for T1 tumours may be confined to perigastric lymph nodes and include local N2 nodes (D1    lymphadenectomy, with variation in nodal groups dissected according to site of cancer).
cA triplet ChT regimen including a ﬂuoropyrimidine, a platinum compound and docetaxel should be given when possible. Recommended treatment duration is 2-3 months pre- and post-operatively.
dSubtotal gastrectomy may be carried out if a macroscopic proximal margin of     3 cm can be achieved. For cancers of the poorly cohesive/diffuse subtype, a margin of 5 cm is advocated.
For patients with stage IB gastric cancer who have undergone surgery without administration of preoperative ChT. However, a peri-operative approach is preferred as adjuvant ChT is less well tolerated than neoadjuvant ChT and neoadjuvant therapy leads to tumour downsizing, allowing for more curative resections.
fA doublet ChT for a total duration of 6 months containing a ﬂuoropyrimidine plus oxaliplatin or docetaxel is recommended.
gFor patients with an R1 resection, adjuvant RT or ChT might be considered as an individual recommendation but is not standard.
hFor patients with MSI-H gastric cancers who have undergone surgery, adjuvant ChT cannot be recommended.
 

 
invasion and grade of differentiation [G1/G2-no ulceration, any diameter; G1/G2-ulceration, diameter 30 mm; G3-no ulceration, diameter 20 mm; SM1 tumours (<500 mm)] have been published and endoscopic resection might be considered for early gastric cancers with fewer than two expanded criteria.57 As some of the criteria (grading, invasion of the submucosa) require an exact histopathological workup, endoscopic resection can primarily be carried out for diagnostic purposes and a resection with no tumour at the
margin (R0) should be aimed for. Two forms of endoscopic resection are used in clinical practice: EMR is acceptable for lesions smaller than 10-15 mm with a very low probability of advanced histology (Paris 0-IIa)23; however, the European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) recommends ESD as the treatment of choice for most gastric superficial neoplastic lesions.56
Endoscopic resection of early gastric cancer should be carried out en bloc and allow for a complete histological evaluation of the lateral and basal resection margins.
Surgery. The extent of surgical resection depends on tumour location, TNM category and histological subtype.
T1 tumours which do not meet the criteria for endoscopic resection require surgery, although less extensive surgery than other gastric cancers. Lymph node dissection for T1 tumours may be confined to perigastric lymph nodes and include local N2 nodes (D1 lymphadenectomy, with vari- ation in nodal groups dissected according to the site of cancer).
For stage IB-III disease, radical gastrectomy is indicated. A proximal margin of   3 cm is recommended for tumours with an expansive growth pattern (including intestinal his- totypes) and 5 cm for those with an infiltrative growth pattern (including poorly cohesive/diffuse histotypes). When these rules cannot be satisfied, it is advisable to examine the whole thickness of proximal resection margin by frozen section. Subtotal gastrectomy can be selected when a satisfactory proximal resection margin can be obtained.58-60
The extent of nodal dissection accompanying radical gastrectomy has been extensively debated. D1 resection implies removal of the perigastric lymph nodes plus those along the left gastric artery. D1 and D2 implies removal of additional lymph nodes along the proper or common hepatic artery, splenic artery or coeliac axis.60 The current AJCC/UICC TNM (8th edition) classification recommends excision of a minimum of 15 lymph nodes for reliable staging.53,54 In Asian countries, observational and rando- mised trials have demonstrated that D2 resection leads to superior outcomes compared with D1 resection.60 In Western countries, patients with resectable disease should undergo D2 resection in specialised, high-volume centres with appropriate surgical expertise and post-operative care.18 The Association of Upper Gastrointestinal Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland has stated that an ideal oesoph- agogastric unit would consist of four to six surgeons each carrying out a minimum of 15-20 oesophagogastric resections per year, serving a population of 1-2 million. The
 
German Cancer Society requires 30 gastric resections per year by two dedicated surgeons to qualify for certification as a gastric cancer centre.18 The concept of ‘enhanced recovery’ encompasses all aspects of optimal peri-operative care for patients undergoing gastrectomy; guidance is pro- vided by relevant Enhanced Recovery After Surgery® Society guidelines on this topic.61
Laparoscopic surgery has the potential benefits of decreased post-operative morbidity and reduced recovery time, with a lymph node yield comparable with open sur- gery.62 Trials from East Asia in early and advanced (T2-T4a) gastric cancer have shown that laparoscopic distal gastrec- tomy is non-inferior with regard to oncological outcomes, with improved short-term outcomes. In Western countries, two small, randomised trials reported similar short-term outcomes between open versus laparoscopic gastrec- tomies, with non-inferior results regarding relapse-free survival. Today, laparotomy is an acceptable approach to achieve total or partial gastrectomy with D2 lymphade- nectomy for gastric cancer. A laparoscopic approach may be selectively proposed in expert hands. Robot-assisted gas- trectomy has shown similar oncological outcomes in terms of survival and lymph node yield compared with conven- tional laparoscopic gastrectomy. With technical advances, future gastric cancer surgery will most likely become increasingly minimally invasive and will probably take advantage of the rapidly developing robotic technologies.32

Peri-operative ChT
The UK-based phase III MAGIC trial demonstrated an improvement in 5-year survival from 23% to 36% [hazard ratio (HR) for death 0.75; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.60- 0.93; P	0.009] in patients with resectable stage II and III gastric cancer treated with six cycles (three pre- and three post-operative) of epirubicinecisplatine5-FU (ECF) compared with surgery alone.63 These data are supported by a similarly designed but smaller French phase III trial that evaluated a regimen of peri-operative cisplatine5-FU, sug- gesting that anthracyclines may not be needed for optimal results.64 Peri-operative ChT has therefore been adopted as the standard of care in Europe and many Western countries. A German phase II-III study investigating eight cycles of peri-operative 5-FUeleucovorineoxaliplatinedocetaxel (FLOT) versus six cycles ECF/epirubicinecisplatinecapecita- bine (ECX) reported a significant improvement in the pri- mary endpoint of OS (median 50 months with FLOT versus
35 months with ECF/ECX; HR 0.77; 95% CI 0.63-0.94; P
0.012), with no major concerns for toxicity.65 Based on these data, the peri-operative use of FLOT (four cycles pre- and four cycles post-operative) should be regarded as standard of care for patients who are able to tolerate a triple cytotoxic drug regimen. For patients unfit for triplet ChT, a combination of a ﬂuoropyrimidine with cisplatin or oxaliplatin is recommended.
In all relevant trials, the post-operative ChT regimen was the same as the preoperative regimen. Whether a different treatment regimen should be used after poor response to
 

 
neoadjuvant ChT is currently unknown. Also, the potential benefit of additional preoperative radiotherapy (RT) to peri- operative ChT is currently undefined and is being explored in clinical trials.

Adjuvant treatment
Adjuvant ChT. Historically, a greater benefit has been noted with adjuvant ChT in Asian studies, and uptake of adjuvant ChT in Europe for patients with resected gastric cancer re- mains limited due to a perceived lack of benefit and routine use of peri-operative ChT. Nevertheless, a large individual patient-level meta-analysis of adjuvant ChT in gastric cancer has confirmed a 6% absolute benefit in 5-year OS for 5-FU- based ChT compared with surgery alone (HR 0.82; 95% CI 0.76-0.90; P < 0.001) in all subgroups tested, including the
group of Western patients.66 A doublet ChT for a total
duration of 6 months containing a ﬂuoropyrimidine plus oxaliplatin or docetaxel is recommended. It is notable, however, that adjuvant ChT is less well tolerated than neoadjuvant ChT and neoadjuvant therapy leads to tumour downsizing, allowing for more curative resections; there- fore, a peri-operative approach is preferred, if possible, so that more patients can benefit from systemic treatment even if the post-operative component of treatment is unable to be delivered.
Adjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Recently, the randomised phase III CRITICS trial concluded that patients undergoing ChT followed by surgery with curative intent have similar OS and progression-free survival (PFS), regardless of whether they receive ChT or chemoradiotherapy (CRT) after sur- gery.67,68 Additionally, the Korean ARTIST and ARTIST II studies did not demonstrate a survival benefit for the addition of RT to adjuvant ChT in patients who had un- dergone gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy.69-71 Therefore, in patients who receive adequate surgery and have a high risk of relapse (e.g. positive nodal status), only adjuvant ChT should be given. The addition of post- operative CRT is not recommended following R0 resec- tion, whereas for patients who have not received pre- operative ChT and have not undergone an appropriate D2 lymphadenectomy, adjuvant CRT can be considered.72,73 In current post-operative CRT regimens, RT should preferably be given as a concomitant regimen of ﬂuoropyrimidine- based CRT to a total dose of 45 Gy in 25 fractions of 1.8 Gy (five fractions per week) by intensity-modulated RT techniques.
In patients who have undergone gastrectomy with involved margins and are not candidates for more extended surgery, post-operative RT or CRT should be discussed by a multidisciplinary tumour board. Post-operative perfor- mance status, comorbidities and additional tumour risk factors, including nodal status, should be considered for decision making. A retrospective Dutch registry study sug- gested that adjuvant CRT was associated with a marginal improvement in survival compared with no further treat- ment in patients who had undergone a resection with microscopic tumour at the margin (R1).74 As in the case of
 
R0 resections, tumour recurrence after R1 resections is mainly systemic rather than local. The potential benefit of additive local post-operative therapies in R1-resected patients must be balanced against overall prognosis and therapy-specific morbidity and mortality. In conclusion, no specific and evidence-based recommendation can be made for patients with R1-resected gastric cancer.
MSI. Patients with MSI-H gastric cancers who have under- gone radical resection have a better prognosis compared with patients with non-MSI-H subtypes of gastric cancer. There seems to be no added benefit of adjuvant ChT in this population, according to retrospective analyses of pro- spectively conducted RCTs.38 Although evidence is limited, adjuvant (post-operative) ChT should be avoided in resected MSI-H gastric cancers.38 Regarding peri-operative treatment of MSI-H disease, combinatorial results from older clinical trials that did not use taxanes did not show a benefit of peri-operative ChT for patients with MSI-H gastric cancer38; however, data from a small number of MSI-H patients treated with FLOT demonstrated better response rates than historical rates with platinume5-FU.75 Therefore, if a response is required to downstage an MSI-H tumour before surgery, FLOT is recommended. This does not, however, imply that FLOT is better than surgery alone as no control group was available to compare in the FLOT4 trial. In the future, it is likely that chemoimmunotherapy or immuno- therapy alone76 may be alternative treatment choices.

Recommendations
Multidisciplinary treatment planning before any treat- ment decision is mandatory [IV, B].


Resection
Endoscopic or surgical resection alone is appropriate for selected very early tumours (stage IA) [III, B].
For stage IB-III gastric cancer, peri-operative therapy and radical gastrectomy is recommended [I, A].
Patients should undergo D2 resection in a high-volume surgical centre [II, B].


Peri-operative ChT
Peri-operative (pre- and post-operative) ChT is recom- mended for patients with stage IB resectable gastric cancer [I, A].
A triplet ChT regimen including a ﬂuoropyrimidine, a platinum compound and docetaxel should be given when possible [I, A].
Peri-operative use of FLOT is standard of care for patients who are able to tolerate a triple cytotoxic drug regimen [I, A; ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS) v1.1 score: A].
For patients unfit for triplet ChT, a combination of a ﬂuoropyrimidine with cisplatin or oxaliplatin is recom- mended [II, B].
 

Adjuvant treatment
For patients with stage IB gastric cancer who have un- dergone surgery without administration of preoperative ChT, adjuvant ChT is recommended [I, A].
For patients who have undergone surgery with clear margins (R0), post-operative RT has no added benefit and should not be given [I, D].
For patients undergoing peri- or post-operative ChT, the addition of post-operative RT has no added benefit and should not be given [I, E].
For patients who have not received preoperative ChT and have not undergone an appropriate D2 lymphade- nectomy, adjuvant CRT can be considered [I, C].
For patients who have undergone surgery with involved margins (R1), adjuvant RT or CRT might be considered as an individual recommendation, but is not standard [IV, C].
For patients with MSI-H gastric cancer who have under- gone curative surgery, adjuvant ChT cannot be recom- mended [IV, D], but if a response is required to downstage a tumour before surgery, FLOT is recommended.

 
MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED AND METASTATIC DISEASE
Locally advanced unresectable or metastatic gastric cancer has a poor prognosis; survival in clinical trials assessing the value of ChT has historically been <1 year in non-Asian countries.32 ChT improves survival in comparison to best supportive care, and combination ChT improves survival compared with single-agent 5-FU.77 Additionally, the use of nivolumab with ChT has recently improved survival for patients with advanced/metastatic disease31 and trastuzumabeChT has improved survival in patients with HER2-positive advanced/metastatic disease.30

First-line ChT, targeted therapy and immunotherapy
A proposed algorithm for the first-line treatment of advanced and metastatic gastric cancer is shown in Figure 2.
ChT. Standard first-line ChT for gastric cancer is a platinume ﬂuoropyrimidine doublet. Oxaliplatin and cisplatin are the most commonly used platinum drugs, whereas ﬂuoro- pyrimidines may be administered as an infusion (5-FU) or as oral treatment [capecitabine or tegafuregimeracileoteracil (S-1)]. Cisplatin and oxaliplatin were shown to be equally effective in RCTs.78,79 In older patients (aged >65 years), oxaliplatin has a superior safety profile and may be asso- ciated with improved survival.79 Oral capecitabine is at least
as effective as infused 5-FU. Infused 5-FU may be favoured when dysphagia is a problem. S-1 is commonly used in
80
 










Figure 2. Treatment algorithm for ﬁrst-line treatment of advanced/metastatic unresectable gastric cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratification; red: surgery; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
5-	FU, 5-ﬂuorouracil; ChT, chemotherapy; CPS, combined positive score; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; IHC, immunohistochemistry; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale; PD-L1, programmed death-ligand 1; S-1, tegafure gimeracileoteracil.
aRecommended platinum compounds are oxaliplatin or cisplatin. Oxaliplatin is preferred, especially for older patients. Recommended ﬂuoropyrimidines are intravenous 5-FU, oral capecitabine or oral S-1. Irinotecane5-FU can be considered an alternative option for patients who do not tolerate platinum compounds.
bHER2 IHC 3   or IHC 2   /FISH-positive.
cPD-L1 status should be reported according to the CPS.
dESMO-MCBS v1.1112 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO- MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms). eESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been defined by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.111
fNivolumabeChT is recommended for advanced, untreated gastric cancer with a
PD-L1 CPS score ≥5 (FDA approved without PD-L1 CPS restriction, EMA approved for PD-L1 CPS ≥5).
 
Asian patients.	In non-Asian populations, pharmacoge-
 
gGastrectomy is not recommended in metastatic gastric cancer unless required
 
netic differences require altered dosing and reduce S-1
tolerability. For older or frail patients, results from the phase III GO-2 trial support dose-reduced oxaliplatin-based
 
for palliation of symptoms.
hResection of metastases cannot be recommended in general, but might be considered as an individual approach in highly selected cases with oligometa- static disease and response to ChT.
 

 
ChT, demonstrating lower toxicity and comparable survival outcomes versus standard dosing.81
The addition of a taxane to a platinum doublet increased radiological response rates and OS in one older phase III randomised trial, but was associated with substantially increased toxicity.82 Phase II trials evaluating taxane-based triplets showed higher toxicity but did not provide level I evidence of higher efficacy.83-85 In the large phase III JCOG1013 study, Japanese patients with advanced gastric cancer were randomly assigned to receive either cisplatine S-1 or cisplatineS-1edocetaxel.86 No differences in radio- logical response rate, PFS or OS were demonstrated between the treatment groups. Due to higher levels of toxicity and uncertain survival benefit over recommended doublet regimens, first-line taxane-based triplet ChT is not recommended as a standard approach.
Irinotecane5-FU has been evaluated in comparison to cisplatine5-FU and to ECX in randomised phase III trials and demonstrated superior time to treatment failure compared with ECX (HR 0.77; 95% CI 0.63-0.93; log-rank P     0.008).
Irinotecane5-FU can be considered an alternative option for patients who do not tolerate platinum compounds.87,88
HER2-positive tumours. Adding trastuzumab to ChT is rec- ommended for patients with HER2-overexpressing (HER2 IHC 3    or IHC 2   /FISH positive) gastric cancer, based on the phase III ToGA study, which demonstrated higher response rates and longer OS (HR 0.74; 95% CI 0.60-0.91; P 0.0046) with trastuzumabeChT compared with ChT alone; additional toxicity was low and manageable.30
Immunotherapy. The phase III CheckMate 649 study eval- uated the addition of nivolumab to ChT (either capecitabineeoxaliplatin or 5-FUeleucovorineoxaliplatin) in patients with treatment-naive gastric, OGJ or oesopha- geal cancer.31 NivolumabeChT resulted in significant improvements   in   OS   (HR   0.71;   98.4%   CI   0.59-0.86;
P   < 0.0001)   and   PFS   (HR   0.68;   98%   CI   0.56-0.81;
P < 0.0001) versus ChT alone in patients with a PD-L1 CPS 5 (minimum follow-up 12.1 months).
In the phase III KEYNOTE-062 trial, pembrolizumab monotherapy was non-inferior to cisplatineﬂuoropyrimidine ChT for OS in patients with PD-L1 CPS 1, but was associated with lower response rates and inferior PFS, and is therefore not recommended.89 Pembrolizumab is approved for patients with AC of the oesophagus and OGJ expressing PD-L1 CPS 10, based on the results of the phase III KEYNOTE-590 trial90; however, KEYNOTE-590 included relatively few patients with AC.
Patients with MSI-H gastric cancer have high response rates and excellent long-term outcomes when treated with anti-PD-1 monotherapy.41,91

Second- and later-line treatment
A proposed algorithm for the second-line treatment of advanced and metastatic gastric cancer is shown in Figure 3. In previously treated gastric cancer, treatment options often follow clinical trials which have enrolled patients with
 
gastric and OGJ cancer. The standard ChT options are paclitaxel, docetaxel and irinotecan, which have equivalent efficacy but different toxicity profiles.77,92 5-FUeleuco- vorineirinotecan (FOLFIRI) is also used, but there are limited data to support this regimen.88 The addition of the anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) antibody, ramucirumab, to paclitaxel improves overall response rate (ORR), PFS and OS, based on the results of the phase III RAINBOW trial.93 In the phase III REGARD trial, ramucirumab monotherapy demonstrated limited response rates but improved OS compared with placebo.94 In the phase III KEYNOTE-061 trial, pembrolizumab monotherapy did not improve survival compared with ChT in second-line gastroesophageal cancer,95 but an exploratory subgroup analysis suggested a benefit in advanced MSI-H gastric cancer.41 In the phase II KEYNOTE-158 trial, pembrolizumab monotherapy was highly active in patients with previously treated advanced MSI-H gastric cancer, demonstrating an ORR of 45.8% and a median PFS of 11 months, with median OS and median duration of response not yet reached.96 Such results have never been reported with ChT. If avail- able, pembrolizumab should therefore be the preferred treatment in this setting.
Trials evaluating second-line trastuzumab combinations,
lapatinib and trastuzumab emtansine have been negative in patients with HER2-positive gastric cancer who have progressed on trastuzumab32; however, a recent phase II Asian randomised trial evaluating the HER2-targeting antibody drug conjugate, trastuzumab deruxtecan, compared with ChT in HER2-positive pre-treated gastric cancer reported a survival benefit for trastuzumab deruxtecan-treated patients.97 Confirmatory global trials have demonstrated comparable response rates in non- Asian populations.98
In the third-line setting for patients with gastric cancer, treatment with triﬂuridineetipiracil has the strongest evi- dence base following the phase III TAGS trial.99 Alternative treatments in chemorefractory gastric cancer include a taxane or irinotecan.77 A proposed algorithm for the third- line treatment of advanced and metastatic gastric cancer is shown in Figure 4.

Surgery for metastatic gastric cancer
The randomised phase III REGATTA trial demonstrated that gastrectomy in addition to ChT without resection of met- astases for oligometastatic gastric cancer did not improve survival compared with ChT alone.100 The phase II AIO- FLOT3 trial reported favourable outcomes in patients with oligometastatic disease after FLOT induction followed by gastrectomy plus resection of the metastatic site, but this study was not randomised.101 The potential benefit of surgery in oligometastatic gastric cancer is currently being explored in two ongoing randomised phase III trials [RE- NAISSANCE (NCT0257836)  and SURGIGAST (NCT03042169)],
but at the present time, data to support routine resection or ablation of oligometastases are limited.102 In case of limited peritoneal carcinomatosis, addition of HIPEC to
 

 
Figure 3. Treatment algorithm for second-line treatment of advanced/metastatic unresectable gastric cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratification; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
ChT, chemotherapy; dMMR, mismatch repair deficient; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; tx, treatment.
aESMO-MCBS v1.1112 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
bESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been defined by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.111
 
cytoreduction has been reported to be safe and may be associated with some improved oncological outcomes, but is yet to be confirmed in larger trials.47-49 Peri-operative ChT with or without HIPEC may also be a strategy for patients with CY without gross peritoneal metastases, but the prognostic benefit of gastrectomy in this situation is currently not established.50-52
Pressurised intraperitoneal aerosol ChT (PIPAC) is a recently developed technique that allows homogeneous locoregional application of intraperitoneal ChT during a laparoscopic procedure. This technique could offer a valu- able alternative for patients with unresectable peritoneal disease. Results from the randomised, controlled, multi- centre phase II PIPAC EstoK 01 trial evaluating PIPAC in addition to intravenous ChT are awaited.103


Supportive care and nutrition
Supportive care is critical for the well-being of patients with gastric cancer. A recent randomised phase III trial demon- strated an increase in survival of 3 months for patients who received multidisciplinary supportive care compared with those who received standard ChT.104 Supportive care in- cludes both palliation of symptoms and nutritional support.
 
Weight loss is multifactorial and may be due to obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract, anorexia, malab- sorption or hypermetabolism. In clinical trial datasets, weight loss of 10% before treatment and 3% during the first cycle of treatment is associated with reduced OS.105 Dysphagia due to proximal gastric tumours may be relieved by RT or stent placement.106 Single-dose brachy- therapy may be a preferred option even after external RT, since it provides better long-term relief of dysphagia with fewer complications than metal stent placement. Stenting is warranted in patients with severe dysphagia, especially with short life expectancy, since the effect on swallowing is immediate, whereas RT (both brachytherapy and external beam) takes around 4-6 weeks for relief of dysphagia.107 Options for patients who are not suitable for RT or stent placement include enteral feeding using nasojejunal or nasogastric tubes, or placement of percutaneous feeding tubes. Distal gastric outlet obstruction may be treated by pyloric stenting or bypass surgery.

Recommendations
First-line ChT, targeted therapy and immunotherapy
First-line ChT with a platinum and ﬂuoropyrimidine is recommended. Oxaliplatin is preferred, especially for
 

Second- and later-line treatment
Ramucirumabepaclitaxel is recommended for second- line treatment of gastric cancer [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2]. Ramucirumab monotherapy is also an option [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1].
Where ramucirumab is not available, paclitaxel, doce- taxel or irinotecan monotherapy [I, A] or FOLFIRI [II, B] are recommended.
Treatment with trastuzumab is not recommended after first-line therapy in HER2-positive advanced gastric cancer [I, D], but trastuzumab deruxtecan may be considered [II, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved, not EMA approved].
Pembrolizumab is recommended for second-line treat- ment of patients with MSI-H/dMMR gastric cancer [II, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-B].
For patients previously treated with two lines of therapy, triﬂuridineetipiracil is recommended [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3]. Alternative treatments include a taxane or irinotecan [II, B].

 









Figure 4. Treatment algorithm for third-line treatment of advanced/meta- static unresectable gastric cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratification; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
ChT, chemotherapy; i.v., intravenous; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale.
aESMO-MCBS v1.1112 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the European Medicines Agency or Food and Drug Administration. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and vali- dated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/ esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
bIf not given previously for advanced/metastatic disease.

older patients [I, A]. S-1 is commonly used in Asian patients [I, A].
Due to higher levels of toxicity and uncertain survival benefit over recommended doublet regimens, first-line taxane-based triplet ChT is not recommended as a stan- dard approach [I, C].
●	Irinotecane5-FU can be considered an alternative option
 
Surgery for metastatic gastric cancer
Gastrectomy is not recommended in metastatic gastric cancer unless required for palliation of symptoms [I, D]. Resection of metastases cannot be recommended in general, but might be considered as an individual approach in highly selected cases with oligometastatic disease and response to ChT [V, C].

Supportive care and nutrition
Care for patients with gastric cancer should include an early palliative care referral and nutritional support [I, A].


FOLLOW-UP, LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND SURVIVORSHIP
In the setting of resectable gastric cancer, the complexity of treatment frequently induces symptoms that adversely affect health-related quality of life. Regular follow-up may allow investigation and treatment of symptoms, psychological support and early detection of recurrence, though there is no evidence that it improves survival outcomes. Follow-up should be tailored to the individual patient and stage of disease.108 Dietary sup-
 
for patients who do not tolerate platinum compounds
[II, B].
TrastuzumabeChT is recommended in patients with HER2-positive tumours [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-A].
NivolumabeChT is recommended for advanced, untreated gastric, OGJ and oesophageal cancer with a PD-L1 CPS 5 [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].
Pembrolizumab is approved for patients with AC of the oesophagus and OGJ expressing PD-L1 CPS 10 [II, C; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].
 
port is recommended, with attention to vitamin and mineral deficiencies.109,110
In the advanced disease setting, regular follow-up is recommended to detect symptoms of disease progression before significant clinical deterioration. If disease progres- sion is suspected, then a clinical history, physical examina- tion and directed blood tests should be carried out. Radiological investigations should be carried out in patients who are candidates for further cancer-specific therapies. For patients receiving cancer-specific therapies such as ChT, CT of the  thorax/abdomen plus  specific body regions of
 

 
interest, if necessary, are typically recommended every 6-12 weeks in order to avoid futile therapy and to switch to alternative treatment options, if available.
The aggressive nature of gastric cancer and historically poor outcomes even in the setting of resectable disease mean that the concept of survivorship is only now begin- ning to evolve. Long-term implications, late effects of therapy and the psychosocial impact of treatment have been poorly studied to date.


Recommendations
Regular follow-up is recommended for investigation and treatment of symptoms, psychological support and early detection of recurrence [III, B].
Follow-up should be tailored to the individual patient and stage of disease [V, B].
Dietary support is recommended with attention to vitamin and mineral deficiencies [V, B].
In the advanced disease setting, regular follow-up is rec- ommended to detect symptoms of disease progression before significant clinical deterioration [IV, B].
Radiological investigations, specifically CT of the thorax and abdomen, should be carried out every 6-12 weeks in patients who are candidates for further cancer- specific therapies [IV, B].


METHODOLOGY
This CPG was developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for CPG development (http://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines- Methodology). The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. An ESCAT table with ESCAT scores is included in Supplementary Table S1, available at https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004. ESCAT scores have been defined by the authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.111 An ESMO-MCBS table with ESMO-MCBS scores is included in Supplementary Table S4, available at https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004.	ESMO-MCBS v1.1112 was used to calculate scores for therapies/in- dications approved by the EMA or FDA (https://www.esmo. org/Guidelines/ESMO-MCBS). The scores have been calcu- lated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee. The FDA/EMA or other regulatory body approval statuses of new therapies/in- dications are reported at the time of writing this CPG. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Supplementary Table S5, available	at	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07. 004.113,114 Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the authors. Future updates to this CPG will be published on esmo.org as a Living Guideline version or an eUpdate, to be made avail- able at: https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/gastrointestinal- cancers/gastric-cancer.
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Manuscript editing support was provided by Jennifer Lamarre (ESMO Guidelines staff) and Angela Corstorphine and Sian- Marie Lucas of Kstorfin Medical Communications Ltd (KMC); this support was funded by ESMO. Nathan Cherny, Chair of the ESMO-MCBS Working Group, Urani Dafni ESMO-MCBS Working Group Member/Frontier Science Foundation Hellas and Giota Zygoura of Frontier Science Foundation Hellas pro- vided review and validation of the ESMO-MCBS scores. Nicola Latino (ESMO Scientific Affairs staff) provided coordination and support of the ESMO-MCBS scores and Angela Cor- storphine and Sian-Marie Lucas of KMC provided medical writing and editing support in the preparation of the ESMO- MCBS table; this support was funded by ESMO. Dr Benedikt Westphalen, Dr Noelia Tarazona (members of the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group) and Dr Svetlana Jezdic (ESMO Medical Affairs Advisor) provided validation support for ESCAT scores.

FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation of this guideline. Production costs have been covered by ESMO, Switzerland from central funds.

DISCLOSURE
FL reports personal fees for advisory board membership of Amgen, Astellas Pharma, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), Bayer, Beigene, BioNTech, Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Novartis, Roche and Daiichi-Sankyo; personal fees as an invited speaker for AstraZeneca, BMS, Eli Lilly, Imedex, Incyte, MedUpdate, Medscape, Merck Serono, MSD, Roche, Servier and StreamedUp!; personal fees from BioNTech and Elsevier for expert testimony; personal fees for writing en- gagements for Deutscher Ärzteverlag, Iomedico and Springer-Nature and a research grant paid to his institute from BMS. SC reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen, Lilly and Servier and personal fees for advisory board membership of BMS, Daiichi, Lilly, MSD and Servier. TF reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen, Bayer, Bristol and Servier; non-remunerated activities as principal investigator (PI) for Adapt Immune, BeiGene and Daiichi Sankyo. KH reports personal fees as for an editorial role as Clinical Editor for Radiotherapy & Oncology. GP re- ports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen and Roche; personal fees for advisory board membership from Astellas, BMS and MSD; personal fees for writing engage- ment and participation in a study on immunonutrition from Nestle; institutional funding as a local PI for Bard, BMS and MSD; non-remunerated advisory role on the French board on colorectal surgery of Johnson & Johnson and participa- tion in the Medtronic-sponsored European group of upper GI surgeons dedicated to minimally invasive surgery. AV reports personal fees for speaker, consultancy and advisory roles for AstraZeneca, Amgen, Basilea, BeiGene, Bayer, Boehringer Mannheim, BMS, BTG, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Imaging Equipment Ltd (AAA), Incyte, Ipsen, Jiangsu Hengrui Medicine, MSD, Pierre Fabre,
 

 
Roche, Sanofi, Servier, Sirtex, Tahio and Terumo; research funding from Incyte and Servier; and participation in educational activities for OncLive and Oncowissen.de. ECS reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen, BMS, Imedex, Merck, Novartis, Prova Education, Servier and touchIME; personal fees for advisory board membership of Astellas, AstraZeneca, BMS, My Personal Therapeutics, Novartis, Roche and Zymeworks; other personal fees from Amgen Trial Steering Group (TSC), BeiGene and Zymeworks for Independent Data Monitoring Committee (IDMC) membership, BMS for expert testimony, Everest Clinical Research as IDMC chair; institutional funding as a local or coordinating PI for clinical trial research from AstraZeneca, Basilea, Daiichi Sankyo, Roche, Merus and MSD and a research grant to her institute from BMS. FC has declared no conﬂicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	Ferlay J, Ervik M, Colombet M, et al. Global Cancer Observatory: Cancer Today. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer. Available at https://gco.iarc.fr/today. Published 2020. Accessed September 30, 2021.
2.	GBD 2017 Stomach Collaborators. The global, regional, and national burden of stomach cancer in 195 countries, 1990-2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease study 2017. Lancet Gas- troenterol Hepatol. 2020;5(1):42-54.
3.	Colquhoun A, Arnold M, Ferlay J, et al. Global patterns of cardia and non-cardia gastric cancer incidence in 2012. Gut. 2015;64(12):1881- 1888.
4.	Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of gastric adenocarcinoma. Nature. 2014;513(7517): 202-209.
5.	Arnold M, Ferlay J, van Berge Henegouwen MI, et al. Global burden of oesophageal and gastric cancer by histology and subsite in 2018. Gut. 2020;69(9):1564-1571.
6.	Rustgi SD, Ching CK, Kastrinos F. Inherited predisposition to gastric cancer. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am. 2021;31(3):467-487.
7.	Garcia-Pelaez J, Barbosa-Matos R, São José C, et al. Gastric cancer genetic predisposition and clinical presentations: established herita- ble causes and potential candidate genes. Eur J Med Genet. 2022;65(1):104401.
8.	Blair VR, McLeod M, Carneiro F, et al. Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: updated clinical practice guidelines. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(8): e386-e397.
9.	Lee K, Krempely K, Roberts ME, et al. Specifications of the ACMG/ AMP variant curation guidelines for the analysis of germline CDH1 sequence variants. Hum Mutat. 2018;39(11):1553-1568.
10.	Choi IJ, Kim CG, Lee JY, et al. Family history of gastric cancer and Helicobacter pylori treatment. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(5):427-436.
11.	Ford AC, Yuan Y, Forman D, et al. Helicobacter pylori eradication for the prevention of gastric neoplasia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020;7(7):CD005583.
12.	Correa P. Gastric cancer: overview. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2013;42(2):211-217.
13.	Choi KS, Jun JK, Suh M, et al. Effect of endoscopy screening on stage at gastric cancer diagnosis: results of the National Cancer Screening Programme in Korea. Br J Cancer. 2015;112(3):608-612.
14.	Fan X, Qin X, Zhang Y, et al. Screening for gastric cancer in China: ad- vances, challenges and visions. Chin J Cancer Res. 2021;33(2):168-180.
15.	Mabe K, Inoue K, Kamada T, et al. Endoscopic screening for gastric cancer in Japan: Current status and future perspectives. Dig Endosc. 2022;34(3):412-419.
16.	Banks M, Graham D, Jansen M, et al. British Society of Gastroen- terology guidelines on the diagnosis and management of patients at risk of gastric adenocarcinoma. Gut. 2019;68(9):1545-1575.
17.	 
Cubiella J, Pérez Aisa Á, Cuatrecasas M, et al. Gastric cancer screening in low incidence populations: position statement of AEG, SEED and SEAP. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021;44(1):67-86.
18.	Allum W, Lordick F, Alsina M, et al. ECCO essential requirements for quality cancer care: oesophageal and gastric cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2018;122:179-193.
19.	Gullo I, Grillo F, Molinaro L, et al. Minimum biopsy set for HER2 evaluation in gastric and gastro-esophageal junction cancer. Endosc Int Open. 2015;3(2):E165-E170.
20.	Tominaga N, Gotoda T, Hara M, et al. Five biopsy specimens from the proximal part of the tumor reliably determine HER2 protein expres- sion status in gastric cancer. Gastric Cancer. 2016;19(2):553-560.
21.	Hamada K, Itoh T, Kawaura K, et al. Examination of endoscopic ul- trasonographic diagnosis for the depth of early gastric cancer. J Clin Med Res. 2021;13(4):222-229.
22.	Ono H, Yao K, Fujishiro M, et al. Guidelines for endoscopic submu- cosal dissection and endoscopic mucosal resection for early gastric cancer (second edition). Dig Endosc. 2021;33(1):4-20.
23.	Endoscopic Classification Review Group. Update on the Paris classi- fication of superficial neoplastic lesions in the digestive tract. Endoscopy. 2005;37(6):570-578.
24.	Borrmann R. Geschwulste des Magens und Duodenum. In: Henke F, Lubarch O, editors. Handbuch der Spezielen Pathologischen Anatomie und Histology. Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag; 1926.
25.	Carneiro F, Fukayama M, Grabsch HI, et al. Gastric adenocarcinoma. In: WHO Classiﬁcation of Tumours Editorial Board, ed. Digestive System Tumours. 5th ed Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2019. p. 85-95.
26.	Japanese Gastric Cancer Association. Japanese classiﬁcation of gastric carcinoma. 15th ed. Tokyo, Japan: Kanehara Shuppan; 2017.
27.	Nakamura K, Sugano H, Takagi K. Carcinoma of the stomach in incipient phase: its histogenesis and histological appearances. Gan. 1968;59(3):251-258.
28.	Lauren P. The two histological main types of gastric carcinoma: diffuse and so-called intestinal-type carcinoma. An attempt at a histo-clinical classification. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand. 1965;64:31-49.
29.	Cristescu R, Lee J, Nebozhyn M, et al. Molecular analysis of gastric cancer identifies subtypes associated with distinct clinical outcomes. Nat Med. 2015;21(5):449-456.
30.	Bang YJ, Van Cutsem E, Feyereislova A, et al. Trastuzumab in com- bination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for treat- ment of HER2-positive advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction cancer (ToGA): a phase 3, open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2010;376(9742):687-697.
31.	Janjigian YY, Shitara K, Moehler M, et al. First-line nivolumab plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for advanced gastric, gastro-oesophageal junction, and oesophageal adenocarcinoma (CheckMate 649): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2021;398(10294):27-40.
32.	Smyth EC, Nilsson M, Grabsch HI, et al. Gastric cancer. Lancet. 2020;396(10251):635-648.
33.	Haffner I, Schierle K, Raimúndez E, et al. HER2 expression, test de- viations, and their impact on survival in metastatic gastric cancer: results from the prospective multicenter VARIANZ study. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(13):1468-1478.
34.	Kulangara K, Zhang N, Corigliano E, et al. Clinical utility of the com- bined positive score for programmed death ligand-1 expression and the approval of pembrolizumab for treatment of gastric cancer. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2019;143(3):330-337.
35.	Wainberg ZA, Fuchs CS, Tabernero J, et al. Efficacy of pembrolizumab monotherapy for advanced gastric/gastroesophageal junction cancer with programmed death ligand 1 combined positive score 10. Clin Cancer Res. 2021;27(7):1923-1931.
36.	Ahn S, Kim KM. PD-L1 expression in gastric cancer: interchangeability of 22C3 and 28-8 pharmDx assays for responses to immunotherapy. Mod Pathol. 2021;34(9):1719-1727.
37.	Yeong J, Lum HYJ, Teo CB, et al. Choice of PD-L1 immunohisto- chemistry assay inﬂuences clinical eligibility for gastric cancer immunotherapy. Gastric Cancer. 2022;25:741-750.
 

 
38.	Pietrantonio F, Miceli R, Raimondi A, et al. Individual patient data meta-analysis of the value of microsatellite instability as a biomarker in gastric cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(35):3392-3400.
39.	Lordick F. Chemotherapy for resectable microsatellite instability-high gastric cancer? Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(2):203.
40.	Smyth EC. Chemotherapy for resectable microsatellite instability-high gastric cancer? Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(2):204.
41.	Chao J, Fuchs CS, Shitara K, et al. Assessment of pembrolizumab therapy for the treatment of microsatellite instability-high gastric or gastroesophageal junction cancer among patients in the KEYNOTE- 059, KEYNOTE-061, and KEYNOTE-062 clinical trials. JAMA Oncol. 2021;7(6):895-902.
42.	Kwee RM, Kwee TC. Imaging in local staging of gastric cancer: a systematic review. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(15):2107-2116.
43.	Nie RC, Yuan SQ, Chen XJ, et al. Endoscopic ultrasonography compared with multidetector computed tomography for the preop- erative staging of gastric cancer: a meta-analysis. World J Surg Oncol. 2017;15(1):113.
44.	Gertsen EC, Brenkman HJF, van Hillegersberg R, et al. 18F-ﬂudeox- yglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography and laparoscopy for staging of locally advanced gastric cancer: a multi- center prospective Dutch cohort study (PLASTIC). JAMA Surg. 2021;156(12):e215340.
45.	Ramos RF, Scalon FM, Scalon MM, et al. Staging laparoscopy in gastric cancer to detect peritoneal metastases: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2016;42(9):1315-1321.
46.	Harmon RL, Sugarbaker PH. Prognostic indicators in peritoneal carcino- matosis from gastrointestinal cancer. Int Semin Surg Oncol. 2005;2(1):3.
47.	Bonnot PE, Piessen G, Kepenekian V, et al. Cytoreductive surgery with or without hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy for gastric cancer with peritoneal metastases (CYTO-CHIP study): a propensity score analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(23):2028-2040.
48.	Bonnot PE, Lintis A, Mercier F, et al. Prognosis of poorly cohesive gastric cancer after complete cytoreductive surgery with or without hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (CYTO-CHIP study). Br J Surg. 2021;108(10):1225-1235.
49.	Rau B, Lang H, Konigsrainer A, et al. The effect of hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) upon cytoreductive surgery (CRS) in gastric cancer (GC) with synchronous peritoneal metastasis (PM): A randomized multicentre phase III trial (GASTRIPEC-I-trial). Ann Oncol. 2021;32(suppl 5):S1040-S1075.
50.	Kobayashi H, Honda M, Kawamura H, et al. Clinical impact ofgastrectomy for gastric cancer patients with positive lavage cytology without gross peritoneal dissemination. J Surg Oncol. 2022;125(4):615-620.
51.	Higaki E, Yanagi S, Gotohda N, et al. Intraoperative peritoneal lavage cytology offers prognostic significance for gastric cancer patients with curative resection. Cancer Sci. 2017;108(5):978-986.
52.	Valletti M, Eshmuminov D, Gnecco N, et al. Gastric cancer with positive peritoneal cytology: survival benefit after induction chemo- therapy and conversion to negative peritoneal cytology. World J Surg Oncol. 2021;19(1):245.
53.	Stomach cancer. In: Amin MB, Edge S, Greene F, et al., editors. AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. New York, NY: Springer; 2017. p. 203-220.
54.	Stomach. In: Brierley JD, Gospodarowicz MK, Wittekind C, editors. UICC TNM Classiﬁcation of Malignant Tumours. 8th ed. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell; 2017.
55.	European Medicines Agency. EMA recommendations on DPD testing prior to treatment with ﬂuorouracil, capecitabine, tegafur and ﬂu- cytosine. Available at https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/ press-release/ema-recommendations-dpd-testing-prior-treatment- ﬂuorouracil-capecitabine-tegafur-ﬂucytosine_en.pdf. Published 2020. Accessed June 20, 2022.
56.	Pimentel-Nunes P, Dinis-Ribeiro M, Ponchon T, et al. Endoscopic submucosal dissection: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endos- copy (ESGE) Guideline. Endoscopy. 2015;47(9):829-854.
57.	Probst A, Schneider A, Schaller T, et al. Endoscopic submucosal dissection for early gastric cancer: are expanded resection criteria safe for Western patients? Endoscopy. 2017;49(9):855-865.
58.	 
Maspero M, Sposito C, Benedetti A, et al. Impact of surgical margins on overall survival after gastrectomy for gastric cancer: a validation of Japanese gastric cancer association guidelines on a Western series. Ann Surg Oncol. 2022;29(5):3096-3108.
59.	De Manzoni G, Marrelli D, Baiocchi GL, et al. The Italian Research Group for Gastric Cancer (GIRCG) guidelines for gastric cancer staging and treatment: 2015. Gastric Cancer. 2017;20(1):20-30.
60.	Japanese Gastric Cancer Association. Japanese gastric cancer treat- ment guidelines 2018 (5th edition). Gastric Cancer. 2021;24(1):1-21.
61.	Mortensen K, Nilsson M, Slim K, et al. Consensus guidelines for enhanced recovery after gastrectomy: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS®) Society recommendations. Br J Surg. 2014;101(10): 1209-1229.
62.	Quan Y, Huang A, Ye M, et al. Comparison of laparoscopic versus open gastrectomy for advanced gastric cancer: an updated meta-analysis. Gastric Cancer. 2016;19(3):939-950.
63.	Cunningham D, Allum WH, Stenning SP, et al. Perioperative chemo- therapy versus surgery alone for resectable gastroesophageal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(1):11-20.
64.	Ychou M, Boige V, Pignon JP, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy compared with surgery alone for resectable gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma: an FNCLCC and FFCD multicenter phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(13):1715-1721.
65.	Al-Batran SE, Homann N, Pauligk C, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy with ﬂuorouracil plus leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and docetaxel versus ﬂuorouracil or capecitabine plus cisplatin and epirubicin for locally advanced, resectable gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adeno- carcinoma (FLOT4): a randomised, phase 2/3 trial. Lancet. 2019;393(10184):1948-1957.
66.	Paoletti X, Oba K, Burzykowski T, et al. Benefit of adjuvant chemo- therapy for resectable gastric cancer: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2010;303(17):1729-1737.
67.	Cats A, Jansen EPM, van Grieken NCT, et al. Chemotherapy versus chemoradiotherapy after surgery and preoperative chemotherapy for resectable gastric cancer (CRITICS): an international, open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2018;19(5):616-628.
68.	de Steur WO, van Amelsfoort RM, Hartgrink HH, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy is superior to chemoradiation after D2 surgery for gastric cancer in the per-protocol analysis of the randomized CRITICS trial. Ann Oncol. 2021;32(3):360-367.
69.	Lee J, Lim DH, Kim S, et al. Phase III trial comparing capecitabine plus cisplatin versus capecitabine plus cisplatin with concurrent capecita- bine radiotherapy in completely resected gastric cancer with D2 lymph node dissection: the ARTIST trial. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(3):268-273.
70.	Park SH, Lim DH, Sohn TS, et al. A randomized phase III trial comparing adjuvant single-agent S1, S-1 with oxaliplatin, and post- operative chemoradiation with S-1 and oxaliplatin in patients with node-positive gastric cancer after D2 resection: the ARTIST 2 trial(5). Ann Oncol. 2021;32(3):368-374.
71.	Park SH, Sohn TS, Lee J, et al. Phase III trial to compare adjuvant chemotherapy with capecitabine and cisplatin versus concurrent chemoradiotherapy in gastric cancer: final report of the adjuvant chemoradiotherapy in stomach tumors trial, including survival and subset analyses. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(28):3130-3136.
72.	Macdonald JS, Smalley SR, Benedetti J, et al. Chemoradiotherapy after surgery compared with surgery alone for adenocarcinoma of the stomach or gastroesophageal junction. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(10): 725-730.
73.	Dikken JL, Jansen EP, Cats A, et al. Impact of the extent of surgery and postoperative chemoradiotherapy on recurrence patterns in gastric cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(14):2430-2436.
74.	Ho VKY, Jansen EPM, Wijnhoven BPL, et al. Adjuvant chemo- radiotherapy for non-pretreated gastric cancer. Ann Surg Oncol. 2017;24(12):3647-3657.
75.	Al-Batran SE, Lorenzen S, Homann N, et al. Pathological regression in patients with microsatellite instability (MSI) receiving perioperative atezolizumab in combination with FLOT vs. FLOT alone for resectable esophagogastric adenocarcinoma: results from the DANTE trial of the
 

 
German Gastric Group at the AIO and SAKK. Ann Oncol. 2021;32(suppl_5):S1069.
76.	Andre T, Tougeron D, Piessen G, et al. Neoadjuvant nivolumab plus ipilimumab and adjuvant nivolumab in patients (pts) with localized microsatellite instability-high (MSI)/mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) oeso-gastric adenocarcinoma (OGA): The GERCOR NEON- IPIGA phase II study. J Clin Oncol. 2022;40(suppl 4):244.
77.	Wagner AD, Syn NL, Moehler M, et al. Chemotherapy for advanced gastric cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;8(8):CD004064.
78.	Cunningham D, Starling N, Rao S, et al. Capecitabine and oxaliplatin for advanced esophagogastric cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(1):36-46.
79.	Al-Batran SE, Hartmann JT, Probst S, et al. Phase III trial in metastatic gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma with ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin plus either oxaliplatin or cisplatin: a study of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(9):1435-1442.
80.	Koizumi W, Narahara H, Hara T, et al. S-1 plus cisplatin versus S-1 alone for first-line treatment of advanced gastric cancer (SPIRITS trial): a phase III trial. Lancet Oncol. 2008;9(3):215-221.
81.	Hall PS, Swinson D, Cairns DA, et al. Efficacy of reduced-intensity chemotherapy with oxaliplatin and capecitabine on quality of life and cancer control among older and frail patients with advanced gastroesophageal cancer: the GO2 phase 3 randomized clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2021;7(6):869-877.
82.	Van Cutsem E, Moiseyenko VM, Tjulandin S, et al. Phase III study of docetaxel and cisplatin plus ﬂuorouracil compared with cisplatin and ﬂuorouracil as first-line therapy for advanced gastric cancer: a report of the V325 Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(31):4991-4997.
83.	Al-Batran SE, Hartmann JT, Hofheinz R, et al. Biweekly ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and docetaxel (FLOT) for patients with met- astatic adenocarcinoma of the stomach or esophagogastric junction: a phase II trial of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie. Ann Oncol. 2008;19(11):1882-1887.
84.	Shah MA, Janjigian YY, Stoller R, et al. Randomized multicenter phase II study of modified docetaxel, cisplatin, and ﬂuorouracil (DCF) versus DCF plus growth factor support in patients with metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma: a study of the US gastric cancer consortium. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(33):3874-3879.
85.	Van Cutsem E, Boni C, Tabernero J, et al. Docetaxel plus oxaliplatin with or without ﬂuorouracil or capecitabine in metastatic or locally recurrent gastric cancer: a randomized phase II study. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(1):149-156.
86.	Yamada Y, Boku N, Mizusawa J, et al. Docetaxel plus cisplatin and S-1 versus cisplatin and S-1 in patients with advanced gastric cancer (JCOG1013): an open-label, phase 3, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;4(7):501-510.
87.	Dank M, Zaluski J, Barone C, et al. Randomized phase III study comparing irinotecan combined with 5-ﬂuorouracil and folinic acid to cisplatin combined with 5-ﬂuorouracil in chemotherapy naive pa- tients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the stomach or esoph- agogastric junction. Ann Oncol. 2008;19(8):1450-1457.
88.	Guimbaud R, Louvet C, Ries P, et al. Prospective, randomized, multicenter, phase III study of ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan versus epirubicin, cisplatin, and capecitabine in advanced gastric adenocarcinoma: a French intergroup (Fédération Francophone de Cancérologie Digestive, Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer, and Groupe Coopérateur Multidisciplinaire en Oncologie) study. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(31):3520-3526.
89.	Shitara K, Van Cutsem E, Bang YJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of pem- brolizumab or pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy vs chemotherapy alone for patients with first-line, advanced gastric cancer: the KEYNOTE-062 phase 3 randomized clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2020;6(10):1571-1580.
90.	Sun JM, Shen L, Shah MA, et al. Pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for first-line treatment of advanced oesophageal cancer (KEYNOTE-590): a randomised, placebo- controlled, phase 3 study. Lancet. 2021;398(10302):759-771.
91.	Pietrantonio F, Randon G, Di Bartolomeo M, et al. Predictive role of microsatellite instability for PD-1 blockade in patients with advanced
 
gastric cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. ESMO Open. 2021;6(1):100036.
92.	Hironaka S, Ueda S, Yasui H, et al. Randomized, open-label, phase III study comparing irinotecan with paclitaxel in patients with advanced gastric cancer without severe peritoneal metastasis after failure of prior combination chemotherapy using ﬂuoropyrimidine plus platinum: WJOG 4007 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(35): 4438-4444.
93.	Wilke H, Muro K, Van Cutsem E, et al. Ramucirumab plus paclitaxel versus placebo plus paclitaxel in patients with previously treated advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma (RAINBOW): a double-blind, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15(11):1224-1235.
94.	Fuchs CS, Tomasek J, Yong CJ, et al. Ramucirumab monotherapy for previously treated advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma (REGARD): an international, randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2014;383(9911):31-39.
95.	Shitara  K,  Özgüro˘glu  M,  Bang  YJ,  et al.  Pembrolizumab  versus  pacli- taxel for previously treated, advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction cancer (KEYNOTE-061): a randomised, open-label, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2018;392(10142):123-133.
96.	Marabelle A, Le DT, Ascierto PA, et al. Efficacy of pembrolizumab in patients with noncolorectal high microsatellite instability/mismatch repair-deficient cancer: results from the phase II KEYNOTE-158 study. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(1):1-10.
97.	Shitara K, Bang YJ, Iwasa S, et al. Trastuzumab deruxtecan in previ- ously treated HER2-positive gastric cancer. N Engl J Med. 2020;382 (25):2419-2430.
98.	van Cutsem E, Di Bartolomeo M, Smyth E, et al. Primary analysis of a phase II single-arm trial of trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd) in west- ern patients (Pts) with HER2-positive (HER2 ) unresectable or met- astatic gastric or gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) cancer who progressed on or after a trastuzumab-containing regimen. Ann Oncol. 2021;32(suppl 5):S1283-S1346.
99.	Shitara K, Doi T, Dvorkin M, et al. Triﬂuridine/tipiracil versus placebo in patients with heavily pretreated metastatic gastric cancer (TAGS): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2018;19(11):1437-1448.
100.	Fujitani K, Yang HK, Mizusawa J, et al. Gastrectomy plus chemo- therapy versus chemotherapy alone for advanced gastric cancer with a single non-curable factor (REGATTA): a phase 3, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(3):309-318.
101.	Al-Batran SE, Homann N, Pauligk C, et al. Effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgical resection on survival in patients with limited metastatic gastric or gastroesophageal junction cancer: the AIO-FLOT3 trial. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3(9):1237-1244.
102.	Kataoka K, Kinoshita T, Moehler M, et al. Current management of liver metastases from gastric cancer: what is common practice? New challenge of EORTC and JCOG. Gastric Cancer. 2017;20(5): 904-912.
103.	Eveno C, Jouvin I, Pocard M. PIPAC EstoK 01: Pressurized IntraPeri- toneal Aerosol Chemotherapy with cisplatin and doxorubicin (PIPAC C/D) in gastric peritoneal metastasis: a randomized and multicenter phase II study. Pleura Peritoneum. 2018;3(2):20180116.
104.	Lu Z, Fang Y, Liu C, et al. Early interdisciplinary supportive care in patients with previously untreated metastatic esophagogastric can- cer: a phase III randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(7): 748-756.
105.	Mansoor W, Roeland EJ, Chaudhry A, et al. Early weight loss as a prognostic factor in patients with advanced gastric cancer: analyses from REGARD, RAINBOW, and RAINFALL phase III studies. Oncologist. 2021;26(9):e1538-e1547.
106.	Dai Y, Li C, Xie Y, et al. Interventions for dysphagia in oesophageal cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;2014(10):CD005048.
107.	Bergquist H, Wenger U, Johnsson E, et al. Stent insertion or endolu- minal brachytherapy as palliation of patients with advanced cancer of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. Results of a random- ized, controlled clinical trial. Dis Esophagus. 2005;18(3):131-139.
 

 
108.	Baiocchi GL, D’Ugo D, Coit D, et al. Follow-up after gastrectomy for cancer: the Charter Scaligero Consensus Conference. Gastric Cancer. 2016;19(1):15-20.
109.	Hu Y, Kim HI, Hyung WJ, et al. Vitamin B(12) deficiency after gas- trectomy for gastric cancer: an analysis of clinical patterns and risk factors. Ann Surg. 2013;258(6):970-975.
110.	Baek KH, Jeon HM, Lee SS, et al. Short-term changes in bone and mineral metabolism following gastrectomy in gastric cancer patients. Bone. 2008;42(1):61-67.
111.	Mateo J, Chakravarty D, Dienstmann R, et al. A framework to rank genomic alterations as targets for cancer precision medicine: the
 
ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets (ESCAT).
Ann Oncol. 2018;29(9):1895-1902.
112.	Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J, et al. ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(10):2340- 2366.
113.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144.
114.	Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18(3):421.
