




 SPECIAL ARTICLE	
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours: ESMOeEURACANeGENTURIS Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up5
P. G. Casali1,2, J. Y. Blay3, N. Abecassis4, J. Bajpai5, S. Bauer6, R. Biagini7, S. Bielack8, S. Bonvalot9, I. Boukovinas10,
J. V. M. G. Bovee11, K. Boye12, T. Brodowicz13, A. Buonadonna14, E. De Álava15,16, A. P. Dei Tos17, X. G. Del Muro18,
A. Dufresne19, M. Eriksson20, A. Fedenko21, V. Ferraresi22, A. Ferrari23, A. M. Frezza1, S. Gasperoni24, H. Gelderblom25,
F. Gouin26, G. Grignani27, R. Haas28,29, A. B. Hassan30, N. Hindi31, P. Hohenberger32, H. Joensuu33, R. L. Jones34, C. Jungels35,
P. Jutte36, B. Kasper32, A. Kawai37, K. Kopeckova38, D. A. Krákorová39, A. Le Cesne40, F. Le Grange41, E. Legius42,
A. Leithner43, A. Lopez-Pousa44, J. Martin-Broto31, O. Merimsky45, C. Messiou46, A. B. Miah47, O. Mir48, M. Montemurro49,
C. Morosi50, E. Palmerini51, M. A. Pantaleo52, R. Piana53, S. Piperno-Neumann54, P. Reichardt55, P. Rutkowski56,
A. A. Safwat57, C. Sangalli58, M. Sbaraglia17, S. Scheipl43, P. Schöffski59, S. Sleijfer60, D. Strauss61, S. J. Strauss41,
K Sundby Hall12, A. Trama62, M. Unk63, M. A. J. van de Sande64, W. T. A. van der Graaf60,65, W. J. van Houdt66, T. Frebourg67y,
A. Gronchi68 & S. Stacchiotti1, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee, EURACAN and GENTURIS*
1Department of Cancer Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan; 2Department of Oncology and Hemato-oncology University of Milan, Milan, Italy; 3Centre Leon Berard and UCBL1, Lyon, France; 4Instituto Portugues de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil, EPE, Lisbon, Portugal; 5Department of Medical Oncology, Tata Memorial Centre, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai, India; 6Department of Medical Oncology, Interdisciplinary Sarcoma Center, West German Cancer Center, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany; 7Department of Oncological Orthopedics, Musculoskeletal Tissue Bank, IFO, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy; 8Klinikum Stuttgart-Olgahospital, Stuttgart, Germany; 9Department of Surgery, Institut Curie, Paris, France; 10Bioclinic Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece; 11Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands; 12Department of Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway; 13Vienna General Hospital (AKH), Medizinische Universität Wien, Vienna, Austria; 14Centro di Riferimento Oncologico di Aviano, Aviano, Italy; 15Institute of Biomedicine of Sevilla (IBiS), Virgen del Rocio University Hospital/CSIC/University of Sevilla/CIBERONC, Seville; 16Department of Normal and Pathological Cytology and Histology, School of Medicine, University of Seville, Seville, Spain; 17Department of Pathology, Azienda Ospedale Università Padova, Padova, Italy; 18Integrated Unit ICO Hospitalet, HUB, Barcelona, Spain; 19Département d’Oncologie Médicale, Centre Leon Berard, Lyon, France; 20Skane University Hospital-Lund, Lund, Sweden; 21P. A. Herzen Cancer Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation; 22Sarcomas and Rare Tumors Unit, IRCCS Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome; 23Pediatric Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan; 24Department of Oncology and Robotic Surgery, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Careggi, Florence, Italy; 25Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands; 26Centre Leon-Berard Lyon, Lyon, France; 27Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO e IRCCS, Candiolo, Italy; 28Department of Radiotherapy, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam; 29Department of Radiotherapy, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands; 30Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; 31Department of Medical Oncology, Fundación Jimenez Diaz, University Hospital, Advanced Therapies in Sarcoma Lab, Madrid, Spain; 32Mannheim University Medical Center, Mannheim, Germany; 33Helsinki University Hospital (HUH) and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 34Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital and Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 35Medical Oncology Clinic, Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium; 36University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands; 37Department of Musculoskeletal Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; 38University Hospital Motol, Prague; 39Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic; 40Department of Cancer Medicine, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; 41Department of Oncology, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (UCLH), London, UK; 42Department for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 43Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria; 44Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Universitario Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain; 45Aviv Sourasky Medical Center (Ichilov), Tel Aviv, Israel; 46Department of Radiology, Royal Marsden Hospital and Institute of Cancer Research, London; 47Department of Oncology, Royal Marsden Hospital and Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 48Department of Ambulatory Cancer Care, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; 49Department of Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland; 50Department of Radiology, IRCCS Foundation National Cancer Institute, Milan; 51Department of Osteoncology, Bone and Soft Tissue Sarcomas and Innovative Therapies, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna; 52Division of Oncology, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria, di Bologna, Bologna; 53Azienda Ospedaliero, Universitaria Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy; 54Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Curie, Paris, France; 55Helios Klinikum Berlin Buch, Berlin, Germany; 56Department of Soft Tissue/Bone Sarcoma and Melanoma, Maria Skłodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland; 57Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark; 58Department of Radiotherapy, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy; 59Department of General Medical Oncology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium; 60Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 61Department of Surgery, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK; 62Department of Research, Evaluative Epidemiology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy; 63Institute of Oncology of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia; 64Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden; 65Department of Medical Oncology, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam; 66Department of Surgical Oncology, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 67Department of Genetics, Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Normandie University, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France; 68Department of Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori and University of Milan, Milan, Italy

        Available online 21 September 2021

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee, EURACAN and GENTURIS).
5Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee, EURACAN and GENTURIS: August 2021. This publication supersedes the previously published version Ann Oncol. 2018;29(suppl 4):iv68-iv78.
yDeceased.
0923-7534/© 2021 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

20	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022
 
P. G. Casali et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
INTRODUCTION
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are malignant mesenchymal tumours with a variable clinical behaviour, marked by differentiation towards the interstitial cells of Cajal.1 GISTs belong to the family of soft tissue sarcomas (STSs) but are treated separately due to their peculiar histogenesis, clinical behaviour and specific therapy. This European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO)eEuropean Reference Network for Rare Adult Solid Cancers (EURACAN)eEuropean Reference Network for Genetic Tumour Risk Syndromes (GENTURIS) Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) will cover GISTs while other STSs are covered in the ESMOeEURACANeEuropean Reference Network for Paediatric Oncology (ERN PaedCan)eGENTURIS STS CPG.2

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
GISTs are the most common sarcomas in the gastrointes- tinal (GI) tract. They are rare tumours with significant variations in reported incidence (from 0.4 to 2 cases per 100 000 per year),3-5 which are likely due to a number of factors. First, there are methodological issues, as the diagnostic criteria improve over time, leading to variations in diagnosis and recording. Second, most established cancer registries record overt ‘malignant’ GIST cases. Most recent data suggest an incidence of about eight cases per million per year.3,4 Importantly, the latest 2020 World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of STS and bone sarcoma codes all GISTs, regardless of size, site of origin and mitotic index, as malignant.1 Thus GIST epidemiological data may prove more reliable in the near future.
There is a slightly higher incidence of GIST in males. The median age is w60-65 years, with a wide range. Occurrence in children is very rare. Paediatric GIST represents a clinically and molecularly distinct subset, marked by female predominance, absence of KIT/PDGFRA mutations, frequent mutations or silencing of the four genes that encode the subunits of the succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) enzyme complex, gastric multicentric location and possible lymph node metastases.6
In a minority of cases the following syndromes are linked to GISTs:
Carney triad syndrome, marked by hypermethylation of SDHC gene of the SDH enzyme complex and clinically characterised by multifocal gastric GISTs, paraganglioma and pulmonary chondromas (these may occur at different ages) with onset in the teenage years and a female predominance.7
Carney-Stratakis syndrome, marked by a germline mutation of one of the subunit (A, B, C and D) genes of the SDH enzyme complex and clinically characterised by a dyad of multifocal gastric GIST and paraganglioma, occurring from late teenage years to the 30s, with no gender predominance and lymph node metastatic potential.8,9
Type 1 neurofibromatosis (NF1), marked by a germline mutation of the NF1 gene, possibly leading to often
 
multicentric GIST, predominantly located in the small bowel.10
Families with germline autosomal dominant mutations of KIT or PDGFRA are extremely rare, presenting with multiple GISTs at an early age, possibly along with other associated features. Pigmented skin macules, urticaria pigmentosa and diffuse hyperplasia of the interstitial cells of Cajal in the gut wall can be seen in KIT mutant cases,11 while patients with germline PDGFRA mutations may have inﬂammatory fibroid polyps in addition to multiple gastric GISTs and hand deformities.12

DIAGNOSIS AND PATHOLOGY/MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
When small submucosal gastric or duodenal nodules <2 cm in size are detected, endoscopic biopsy may be difficult and laparoscopic/open excision may be the only way to make a histological diagnosis. Many of these small nodules, if diagnosed as GISTs, will be either low risk or very low risk,
and their clinical significance remains unclear. The standard approach for patients with oesophagogastric or duodenal submucosal nodules <2 cm is endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) assessment. If biopsy is feasible and a diagnosis of GIST is made, resection should be performed, unless major morbidity is expected (i.e. oesophagogastric junction, second portion of the duodenum on the medial aspect). Endoscopic resection, when a complete excision without tumour   rupture   is   technically   possible,   could   be   an
acceptable alternative to conventional full-thickness laparoscopic/open resections to minimise morbidity. As an option, however, patients can choose to undergo active surveillance, depending on site of origin of the tumour, age, life expectancy and comorbidities. Surgical excision could be reserved for patients whose tumour increases in size or becomes symptomatic [IV, C]. If a biopsy is not feasible or results in inadequate material for diagnosis, active surveillance is generally recommended. As an option, patients can choose to undergo surgical/endoscopic resection also depending on age, life expectancy and comorbidities. When active surveillance is the choice, an evidence-based, optimal follow-up policy is lacking. A logical approach may be to have a short-term first assessment (e.g. at 3 months) and then, in the case of no evidence of growth, a follow-up interval can be increased.
Conversely, the standard approach to rectal nodules is represented by biopsy or excision after endorectal ultrasound assessment and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), regardless of the tumour size and mitotic rate. In fact, the risk of progression to a clinically significant GIST at this site is higher than most gastric GISTs, its prognosis is significantly worse and the local implications for surgery are more critical.
The standard approach to tumours 2 cm in size is biopsy/excision because they are associated with a higher risk of progression if confirmed as GIST [IV, C]. If there is an abdominal nodule or a mobile mass in the abdominal cavity not amenable to endoscopic assessment, laparoscopic/open
 
Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	21
 
Annals of Oncology	P. G. Casali et al.

 
excision is the standard approach. If there is a large mass and surgery is likely to be a multivisceral resection, multiple core needle biopsies are the standard approach. They should be obtained through EUS guidance, or through an ultrasound/computed tomography (CT)-guided percuta- neous approach. This may allow the surgeon to plan the best strategy according to the histological diagnosis, enable consideration of neoadjuvant treatment and avoid surgery for diseases for which it is not recommended (e.g. lymphomas, mesenteric fibromatosis and germ-cell tumours). The risk of peritoneal contamination or bleeding is negligible if the procedure is properly carried out. Moreover, lesions at risk (e.g. cystic masses and/or mobile masses in the abdomen) should be assessed and biopsied only at specialised centres. Immediate laparoscopic/open excision is an option on an individualised basis, especially if surgery is associated with limited morbidity. If a patient presents with obvious metastatic disease, a biopsy of the metastatic focus (if easier to make in comparison to the primary tumour) is sufficient to establish the diagnosis and decide the treatment. The tumour sample should be fixed in 4% buffered formalin solution (Bouin fixative should not be used, as it prevents molecular analysis).
Pathologically, the diagnosis of GIST relies on morphology and immunohistochemistry, the latter typically being positive for CD117 (KIT) and/or DOG1 (Table 1).13,14 A proportion of GISTs (in the range of 5%) are CD117-negative. The mitotic count has a prognostic value and should be expressed as the number of mitoses on a total area of 5 mm2 [which should replace, and is equivalent to, the 50 high-power field area, in order to avoid variability]. In terms of prognosis, mitotic count is a continuous variable and should therefore be expressed as such. This should also be taken into account when using risk classifications employing thresholds, which are highly artificial. Ki-67 analysis does not replace the mitotic count and is not part of established prognostic systems in this disease. Mutational analysis for known mutations involving KIT and PDGFRA can confirm the diagnosis of GIST, if doubtful (particularly in rare CD117/DOG1 immuno- histochemically negative GISTs). Mutational analysis has a predictive value for sensitivity to molecular-targeted therapy as well as a prognostic relevance. Its inclusion in the diagnostic work-up of all GISTs should be considered standard practice [II, A] (with the possible exclusion of
<2 cm nonrectal GISTs, which are very unlikely ever to be candidates   for   medical   treatment).   Centralisation   of
mutational analysis in a laboratory enrolled in an external quality assurance programme and with expertise in the disease may be useful. Centralised pathological diagnosis is more strongly recommended for GISTs without typical molecular alterations. In rare cases, a BRAF mutation or an NTRK gene rearrangement may be found, which may have therapeutic implications.15 In GISTs without detectable mutations in KIT/PDGFRA, immunohistochemistry for SDH complex subunit B (SDHB) is carried out to identify SDH-deficient GIST. In quadruple-negative GIST (for KIT/PDGFRs/BRAF/SDH), an unrecognised underlying NF1
 

Table 1. Personalised medicine synopsis
Biomarker	Method	Use	LoE	GoR
Mitotic index	Pathology	Disease classification	IV	A
	Prognostic relevance	
	Used for medical	
	treatment decisions	
KIT mutations	Sanger sequencing or NGS	Disease classification Prognostic relevance Predictive relevance Used for medical treatment decisions Currently actionable/
targetable	I	A
PDGFRA mutations	Sanger sequencing or NGS	Disease classification Prognostic relevance Predictive relevance Used for medical treatment decisions Currently actionable/
targetable	I/III	A
NTRK mutations	Sanger sequencing or NGS	Disease classification Predictive relevance Used for medical treatment decisions Currently actionable/
targetable	III	A
BRAF mutations	Sanger sequencing or NGS	Disease classification Predictive relevance Used for medical treatment decisions Currently actionable/
targetable	V	B
SDH mutations/	IHC	Disease classification	I	A
epimutations	Prognostic relevance	
	Predictive relevance	
	Used for medical	
	treatment decisions	
GoR, grade of recommendation; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LoE, level of evidence; NGS, next-generation sequencing; PDGFRA, platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase.

 

syndrome should be excluded. Even if formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded material allows routine molecular diagnostics, the collection of fresh snap-frozen tissue is encouraged, to allow subsequent molecular assessments, particularly in the context of research. Informed consent for tumour storage (adhering to local and international guidelines) should be sought, enabling later analyses and research.
Multidisciplinary treatment planning is needed involving pathologists, radiologists, surgeons, medical oncologists, as well as gastroenterologists and nuclear medicine specialists, as applicable. Management should be carried out at reference centres for sarcomas and GISTs and/or within reference networks sharing multidisciplinary expertise and treating a high number of patients annually. These centres are involved in ongoing clinical trials, in which the enrolment of GIST patients is common practice.

Recommendations
EUS assessment is the standard approach for patients with oesophagogastric or duodenal nodules <2 cm [IV, C].
If a diagnosis of GIST is made on biopsy, resection is per- formed unless one expects major morbidity. If a biopsy is not feasible, active surveillance is a valid alternative [IV, C].
 

22	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022
 
P. G. Casali et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
Biopsy/excision is the standard approach to tumours 2 cm in size [IV, C].
Mutational analysis inclusion in the diagnostic work-up of all GISTs should be considered standard practice [II, A] (with the possible exclusion of <2 cm nonrectal GISTs).

STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
The mitotic rate, tumour size and tumour site are important prognostic factors (gastric GISTs have a better prognosis than small bowel or rectal GISTs). Tumour rupture is an additional adverse prognostic factor and should be recorded, regardless of whether it took place before or during surgery. Mutational status has not been incorporated in any risk classification at present, although some genotypes have a distinct natural history16 and, above all, GISTs without the most typical mutations have peculiar clinical presentations and clinical course. Among mutated GISTs, those with a PDGFRA mutation corresponding to D842V are generally associated with a good prognosis. On the contrary, KIT exon 11 deletions involving codons 557-558 have been repeatedly reported to be associated with a high risk for relapse.17
The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)eUnion
for International Cancer Control (UICC) stage classification is rarely used, given the natural history of GISTs. On the contrary, several risk classifications have been proposed to assess the risk of relapse of a localised disease. A widely used risk classification was proposed by the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, which incorporates the primary mitotic count, tumour size and tumour site (i.e. the three main prognostic factors in localised GISTs).18,19 A nomogram utilising all three criteria has been developed on another series.20 When using these tools, it is important to appreciate that the mitotic index and tumour size are continuous variables, so that thresholds need to be inter- preted wisely. Prognostic contour maps were generated through a pooled series of GIST patients not treated with adjuvant therapy, which incorporated the mitotic index and tumour size as continuous variables. In addition, tumour rupture was considered.21 They have been validated against a reference series.22 One should be aware that available risk classifications essentially refer to KIT-mutated GISTs.
Staging procedures are selected taking into account that most relapses affect the peritoneum and the liver. Triple phase contrast-enhanced abdominal and pelvic CT scan is the investigational method of choice for staging and follow-up. MRI may be an alternative procedure, especially for rectal GISTs, where MRI provides better preoperative staging information.23 Chest CT scan and routine laboratory testing complement the staging work-up of new patients. The evaluation of [18F]2-ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) uptake using an FDGepositron emission tomography (PET) scan, or FDGePET-CT/MRI, may be useful mainly when early detection of the tumour response to molecular-targeted therapy is of special interest or when surgical resection of metastatic disease is considered.24
 
MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL/LOCOREGIONAL DISEASE
The standard treatment of localised GISTs is a complete surgical excision of the lesion, with no dissection of clinically negative lymph nodes [III, A] (Figure 1). If a laparoscopic (including robotic) excision is planned, all principles of oncological surgery should be followed [III, A].25 A laparoscopic/robotic approach is clearly discouraged in patients who have large tumours, because of the risk of tumour rupture, which is associated with a very high risk of relapse.21,22 For selected presentations (small tumours in the upper or lower GI tract), endoscopic excisions may be considered at sarcoma reference centres with experience in endoscopic surgery. In any case, R0 excision is the goal (i.e. an excision whose margins are clear of tumour cells at least at the site of origin in the GI tract). In low-risk GISTs located in unfavourable locations the decision can be made with the patient to accept possibly R1 (microscopically positive) margins [IV, B], given the lack of any formal demonstration that R1 surgery is associated with a worse overall survival (OS).26 If R1 excision was already carried out, a re-excision is not recommended on a routine basis. Of note, the microscopic margin status should not be used to dictate adjuvant medical therapy decisions.26
Adjuvant treatment with imatinib for 3 years was associated with a relapse-free survival (RFS) and OS advantage in comparison with 1 year of therapy in high-risk patients in a randomised trial.27 Previously, a placebo- controlled trial demonstrated that imatinib given for a planned duration of 1 year could prolong RFS in localised GISTs having a diameter 3 cm with a macroscopically complete resection.28 Another study comparing adjuvant imatinib for 2 years against surgery alone also demonstrated an improvement in RFS in intermediate- and high-risk GISTs.29 Therefore adjuvant therapy with imatinib for 3 years is the standard treatment for patients with a significant risk of relapse [I, A; ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS) v1.1 score: A]. An individualised shared decision-making process is needed when the risk is intermediate (i.e. in the 30%-50% range)18,19,30,31 and the risk assessment might be refined also through genotyping the specific KIT mutation. One should note that available efficacy data refer to high-risk patients.18,19,31 Randomised clinical studies are ongoing to test durations of adjuvant therapy longer than 3 years.
The benefit associated with adjuvant imatinib may vary according to the type of KIT/PDGFRA mutation, being greater in patients with KIT exon 11 deletion mutations.31,32 Mutational analysis predicts the sensitivity to molecular- targeted therapy as well as the prognosis. There is a consensus that PDGFRA D842V-mutated GISTs should not be treated with any adjuvant therapy, given the lack of sensitivity to imatinib of this genotype both in vitro and in vivo [IV, D], and the current lack of any evidence of efficacy in the adjuvant setting for agents now available active against PDGFRA-mutated GIST. Given the data supporting the use of a higher dose of imatinib (800 mg daily) in the case of a KIT exon 9 mutation in advanced GIST,
 

Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	23
 
Annals of Oncology	P. G. Casali et al.

Figure 1. Treatment algorithm for localised GISTs with imatinib-sensitive mutations.
Purple: general categories or stratification; red: surgery; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
EMA, European Medicines Agency; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; GIST, gastrointestinal stromal tumour; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale. R0, no tumour at the margin; R1, microscopic tumour at the margin.
a ESMO-MCBS version 1.172 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/scale-evaluation-forms-v1.0-v1.1/scale- evaluation-forms-v1.1).
b 36 months overall, considering adjuvant and neoadjuvant imatinib when preoperative imatinib is given.
 
some expert clinicians prefer to use this dose even in the adjuvant setting for this genotype [II, B; ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets (ESCAT) score: I-A].33-35 Regulatory constraints may limit this practice of an adjuvant dose of 800 mg daily, which is currently not supported by any prospective evidence. A summary of genomic alterations and actionable drug matches in GISTs is provided in Table 2.
There is a consensus to avoid imatinib or any adjuvant treatment in NF1-related and SDH expression-negative GISTs [IV, D] as well as in BRAF-mutated or NTRK-rearranged cases. This reﬂects their lack of sensitivity to imatinib, sunitinib and regorafenib in the advanced setting. European and international cooperation is vital to determine best practices in the exceedingly rare paediatric GIST.
Tumour rupture is an important adverse prognostic factor. It is defined as tumour spillage or fracture in the abdominal cavity, piecemeal resection, laparoscopic/open incisional biopsy, GI perforation to the abdominal cavity, blood-tinged ascites or microscopic transperitoneal infiltration into an adjacent structure. In contrast, minor defects of tumour integrity (such as those caused by core
 
needle biopsy), peritoneal tumour penetration, iatrogenic superficial tumour capsule laceration or microscopically positive margins (R1) are not considered tumour rupture, as the outcome of these patients was shown to be similar to when the removed lesion is intact.36-38
In case of tumour rupture, micrometastatic disease can be assumed to exist. This puts the patient at a very high risk of relapse.39 Therefore these patients should be considered for imatinib therapy [IV, A], even though the optimal duration of post-operative imatinib in this patient population is not defined given the uncertainty around whether these cases should be considered as already metastatic.
If R0 surgery is not feasible, or it could be achieved through less mutilating, function-sparing surgery in the case of volumetric reduction (this includes total gastrectomy and all other major procedures), pre-treatment with imatinib is standard, as long as the mutation profile of the tumour is sensitive [III, A] (Figure 1).40,41 This may also be the case if the surgeon believes that the surgical resection is safer after cytoreduction (e.g. the risk of bleeding and tumour rupture is decreased). A shortcoming may be the lack of a reliable evaluation of mitotic count for accurate risk stratification on
 

24	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022
 
P. G. Casali et al.	Annals of Oncology

 

Table 2. Genomic alterations and actionable drug matches
Genomic alteration	Drug match	ESCAT
scorea,b
KIT mutations	Adjuvant imatinib	I-A33-35
PDGFRA D842V
mutations	Preoperative avapritinib	I-B48
NTRK
rearrangements	NTRK inhibitors (e.g. larotrectinib, entrectinib)	I-C51
BRAF mutations	BRAF inhibitors (including BRAFeMEK inhibitor combinations)c
III-Ac,53
BRAF, v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale; NTRK, neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase; PDGFRA, platelet- derived growth factor receptor alpha.
a ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been defined by
the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.
b I-A, alterationedrug match is associated with improved outcome with evidence
from randomised clinical trials showing the alterationedrug match in a specific tumour type results in a clinically meaningful improvement of a survival endpoint; I-B, alterationedrug match is associated with improved outcome with evidence from prospective, nonrandomised clinical trials showing that the alterationedrug match in a specific tumour type results in clinically meaningful benefit as defined by ESMO-MCBS v1.1; I-C, alterationedrug match is associated with improved outcome with evidence from clinical trials across tumour types or basket clinical trials showing clinical benefit associated with the alterationedrug match, with similar benefit observed across tumour types; III-A, alterationedrug match is suspected to improve outcome based on patients with the specific alteration but in a different tumour type, with limited/absence of clinical evidence available for the patient-specific cancer type or broadly across cancer types.52
c This is an off-label indication justified by biological plausibility.

 

biopsy, thus making decisions regarding post-operative therapy challenging. Of note, the presence of bleeding or fistulas does not necessarily prevent neoadjuvant therapy. A biopsy including mutational analysis is recommended to confirm the histological diagnosis and to exclude less sensitive or resistant genotypes to imatinib and the possible choice of an 800-mg imatinib dose for KIT exon 9 mutations.42 In case of PDGFRA-D842V mutations, the use of preoperative avapritinib may be considered [III, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-B]. Surgeons should be actively involved to optimally monitor the patient during cytoreductive treatment and to choose when to carry out surgery, depending on when the treatment goal is achieved. In general, surgery is carried out after 6-12 months of treatment, as after the 12-month time point further shrinkages are rare, while secondary resistance may develop subsequently. Early tumour response assessment is required to avoid delaying surgery in the case of nonresponding disease. Functional imaging makes it possible to assess the tumour response very rapidly, within a few weeks, particularly in the absence of mutational analysis. There are limited data to guide the physician on when to stop imatinib before surgery; however, it can be safely stopped a few days or even 1 day before surgery, to be resumed promptly when the patient recovers from surgery, in order to reach a total of 3 years of treatment.


Recommendations
The standard treatment of localised GISTs is complete surgical excision of the lesion, with no dissection of clinically negative lymph nodes [III, A]. R0 excision  is
 
the goal (i.e. an excision whose margins are clear of tumour cells at least at the site of origin in the GI tract). If laparoscopic excision is planned, the technique needs to follow the principles of oncological surgery [III, A].
In low-risk GISTs located in unfavourable locations the decision can be made with the patient to accept possibly R1 (microscopically positive) margins [IV, B].
Adjuvant therapy with imatinib 400 mg/day for 3 years is the standard treatment for patients with a significant risk of relapse [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: A].
In the case of KIT exon 9 mutation, adjuvant imatinib at a higher dose of 800 mg daily for 3 years may be considered [II, B; ESCAT score: I-A].
PDGFRA exon 18 D842V-mutated GISTs should not be treated with adjuvant therapy [IV, D].
Adjuvant treatment should be avoided in NF1-related and SDH expression-negative GISTs [IV, D].
Patients at a very high risk of relapse due to tumour rupture at the time of surgery should be considered for adjuvant imatinib therapy [IV, A].
If R0 surgery is not feasible or implies major sequelae and the tumour harbours a sensitive mutation, preoperative treatment with imatinib is standard [III, A]. In case of PDGFRA-D842V mutation, neoadjuvant avapritinib may be considered [III, A: ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-B].

MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED/METASTATIC DISEASE
Imatinib is the standard treatment for locally advanced, inoperable and metastatic patients [I, A] (Figure 2),43-46 including patients previously treated with adjuvant imatinib who did not relapse while receiving it. Imatinib is also the standard treatment for metastatic patients who have had all lesions removed surgically, although surgery is not recommended as a primary approach in the metastatic setting. The standard dose of imatinib is 400 mg daily [I, A; ESCAT score: I-A]. However, some data suggest that patients with tumours harbouring a KIT exon 9 mutation have a significantly higher response rate and better progression-free survival (PFS) on a higher dose level (i.e. 800 mg daily), which is therefore held as standard treatment in this subgroup [III, B; ESCAT score: I-A].42 Patients with a PDGFRA exon 18 D842V mutation are generally insensitive to imatinib.47 They have now shown sensitivity to avapritinib, which targets this mutation [III, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-B].48
Avapritinib is able to provide a >90% response rate, with a duration of response in excess of 70% at 1 year. PDGFRA
mutations other than exon 18 D842V are sensitive to imatinib and are thus best treated with this agent. Important adverse events of avapritinib are neurocognitive toxicity, brain bleeds and seizures, which need to be recognised early in order to minimise risks that they may undermine treatment continuation.
With regard to SDH-deficient GIST, there may be some benefit from available tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), with reports of activity of sunitinib and regorafenib.49 Other
 

Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	25
 
Annals of Oncology	P. G. Casali et al.

 
agents are under study, including temozolomide, with interesting preliminary results.50
Patients with GIST with NTRK rearrangement are known to have been sensitive to treatment with neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK) inhibitors such as larotrectinib [III, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-C] and entrectinib [III, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1. score: 3; ESCAT score: I-C].51,52
GIST with BRAF mutations may benefit from BRAF inhibitors (including BRAFeMEK inhibitor combinations).53 This is an off-label indication justified by biological plausibility [V, B; ESCAT score: III-A].52
In the metastatic setting, treatment with imatinib should be continued indefinitely, until clinically relevant disease progression or intolerance, because treatment interruption is generally followed by relatively rapid tumour progression, even when lesions have been previously excised surgically [I, A].54 The patient should be informed about the importance of complying with imatinib therapy, as well as interactions with concomitant medications and food, and the best ways to
 
handle side-effects. Dose intensity should be maintained by proper management of side-effects, and a correct policy of dose reductions and interruptions should be applied in the case of excessive, persistent toxicity. Aside from its potential use to tailor the imatinib dose, assessment of plasma levels may be useful in the case of: (i) patients receiving concomi- tant medications that put them at a risk of major interactions or patients with previous surgical resections potentially leading to decreased plasma levels; (ii) unexpected toxicities; and (iii) unexpected inadequate response in sensitive geno- types. Currently, evaluation of imatinib plasma levels is not part of the routine care of GIST patients.
Close monitoring of tumour response should be carried out in the early phases of treatment. Follow-up should be continued throughout treatment, because the risk of secondary progression persists over time. Complete excision of residual metastatic disease has been shown to be associated with a good prognosis, provided the patient is responding to imatinib, but it has never been demonstrated
 

 
Figure 2. Treatment algorithm for advanced/metastatic GISTs.
Purple: general categories or stratification; red: surgery; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
BRAF, v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets; EMA, European Medicines Agency; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; GIST, gastrointestinal stromal tumour; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale; NTRK, neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase; SDH succinate dehydrogenase.
a Until progression.
b ESMO-MCBS version 1.172 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/scale-evaluation-forms-v1.0-v1.1/scale- evaluation-forms-v1.1).
c Refer to text.

26	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022
 
P. G. Casali et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
prospectively whether this is due to surgery or to patient selection.55-58 Randomised trials did not prove feasible (being stopped early because of slow accrual), except for a low-power positive trial in which all patients had peritoneal disease.59 Thus the surgical decision should be individualised and shared with the patient [III, C]. Surgical excision of progressing disease has not been beneficial in published retrospective series, but surgery of focal progression, such as the ‘nodule within a mass’, up to one or few nodules/masses when the rest of the disease is still responding, has been associated with a PFS in the same range as for any further- line treatment. Therefore this may be an option for the individual patient with limited progression, while continuing imatinib at the same dose [IV, C]. Nonsurgical procedures [e.g. local treatment, such as ablations or radiotherapy (RT)] may be selected. In the case of tumour progression on 400 mg, an option may be to increase the imatinib dose to 800 mg daily (if treated with the lower dose) [III, B], with the exception of insensitive mutations.43-46 Dose escalation is particularly useful in the case of a KIT exon 9-mutated GIST (if a higher dose was not selected from the beginning) and possibly in the case of ﬂuctuations in drug pharmacokinetics over time. False progression on imaging should be ruled out due to the response patterns (see ‘Response evaluation’ section). Besides, patient noncompliance should be ruled out as a possible cause of tumour progression, as well as drug interactions with concomitant medications.
In the case of confirmed progression or rare intolerance on imatinib (after attempts to manage side-effects through expert advice, exploiting dose reductions and possibly plasma level assessment), standard second-line treatment is sunitinib [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].60 The drug was proven effective in terms of PFS when administered at the dose of 50 mg daily following a ‘4 weeks on/2 weeks off’ regimen. Data have shown that a continuously dosed daily oral regimen with a lower daily dose (37.5 mg) is effective and well tolerated, although no formal comparison has been carried out within a randomised clinical trial.61 This schedule can therefore be considered an option [III, C].
After confirmed progression on sunitinib, a prospective, placebo-controlled, randomised trial proved that regorafenib, at the dose of 160 mg daily for 3 out of every 4 weeks, can prolong PFS. This therapy is therefore standard third-line therapy for patients progressing on or failing to benefit from imatinib and sunitinib [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].62 In a prospective, randomised trial patients with metastatic disease progressing on standard therapy (imatinib, sunitinib and regorafenib) were shown to benefit
from ripretinib [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].63
Patients with metastatic GIST should be considered for participation in clinical trials of new therapies or combinations. There is controlled evidence that patients who have already progressed on imatinib may benefit when rechallenged with the same drug.64 Likewise, there is evidence that continuing a treatment with a TKI, even in the case of progressive disease, may slow down progression as opposed to stopping it (if no other option is available at the time), at least in a proportion of patients with a slow
 
progression.   Therefore,   a   rechallenge   with   imatinib (to which the patient has already been exposed) and continuation of the ongoing therapy beyond progression are options [II, B]. By contrast, the use of combinations of TKIs outside of clinical studies should be discouraged, because of the potential for considerable toxicity.
Several TKIs have been tested in uncontrolled phase II trials in imatinib-resistant patients, with activity observed in some of them.65,66
RT may be considered as a palliative resource for selected patients.

Response evaluation
Response evaluation is complex, and early progression should be confirmed by an experienced team. Antitumour activity translates into tumour shrinkage in most patients, but some patients may show changes only in tumour density on CT scan, or these changes may precede delayed tumour shrinkage. These changes in tumour radiological appearance should be considered as pointing to a tumour response. Even an initial increase in the tumour size may be indicative of a tumour response if the tumour density on the CT scan is decreased.67 The ‘appearance’ of new lesions could also be due to the ease in detecting less dense tumours. Therefore, both tumour size and tumour density on CT scan, or consistent changes in MRI or   contrast-enhanced   ultrasound, should be considered as criteria for tumour response. An FDGePET scan has proven to be highly sensitive in early assessment of tumour response and may be useful in cases where there is doubt, or when early prediction of the response is particularly useful (e.g. preoperative cytoreductive treatments).47 However, a small proportion of GISTs have no FDG uptake. The absence of tumour progression after 6 months of treatment is also considered as tumour response.68 By contrast, tumour progression may not be accompanied by changes in the tumour size. In fact, some increase in the tumour density within tumour lesions may be indicative of tumour progression. A typical progression pattern is the ‘nodule within the mass’, by which a portion of a responding lesion becomes hyperdense.69

Recommendations
Imatinib is the standard first-line treatment for locally advanced, inoperable and metastatic patients, except for GIST without KIT/PDGFRA mutations or with a PDGFRA exon 18 D842V mutation [I, A]. The standard dose of imatinib is 400 mg daily [I, A].
Imatinib is also the standard treatment for metastatic patients who have had all lesions removed surgically and the tumour harbours a sensitive genotype, although surgery is not recommended as a primary approach in the metastatic setting [I, A].
Standard first-line treatment for patients with KIT exon 9 mutation is imatinib 800 mg daily [III, B; ESCAT score: I-A].
 

Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	27
 
Annals of Oncology	P. G. Casali et al.

 
Standard first-line treatment for patients with PDGFRA exon 18 D842V mutations is avapritinib 300 mg daily [III, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1. score: 3; ESCAT score: I-B].
In the metastatic setting, treatment should be continued indefinitely, unless intolerance or specific patient request to interrupt [I, A]. Surgery of residual metastatic disease should be individualised [III, C].
Surgical excision of progressing disease should be considered for an individual patient with limited progression, while continuing imatinib [IV, C].
In the case of tumour progression on 400 mg of imatinib, the dose can be increased to 800 mg daily (with the exception of insensitive mutations) [III, B].
In the case of confirmed progression or rare intolerance on imatinib, standard second-line treatment is sunitinib 50 mg daily 4 weeks on/2 weeks off or, as alternative schedule, 37.5 mg once daily [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
Regorafenib, at the dose of 160 mg daily for 3 out of every 4 weeks, is the standard third-line therapy for pa- tients progressing on or failing to respond to imatinib and sunitinib [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
Ripretinib at the dose of 150 mg daily is the standard fourth-line treatment in patients progressing on or intolerant to imatinib, sunitinib, regorafenib [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
SDH-deficient GISTs are insensitive to imatinib and can have some sensitivity to sunitinib and regorafenib [III, B]. NTRK-rearranged GISTs are sensitive to treatment with NTRK inhibitors (e.g. larotrectinib, entrectinib) [III, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-C].
BRAF-mutated GISTs benefit from BRAF inhibitors (including BRAFeMEK inhibitor combinations) [V, B; ESCAT score: III-A].
Rechallenge with imatinib (to which the patient has already been exposed with evidence of response) or continuation of treatment beyond progression is an option [II, B].
RT may be considered as a palliative resource for selected patients [V, B].

FOLLOW-UP, LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND SURVIVORSHIP
There are no published data to indicate the optimal routine follow-up policy for surgically treated patients with localised disease. Relapses occur more often to the liver and/or peritoneum. Bone lesions and other sites of metastases may be less rare along the course of metastatic disease treated with several lines of therapy. The mitotic rate likely affects the speed at which relapses take place. Risk assessment based on the mitotic count, tumour size and tumour site may be useful in choosing the routine follow-up policy. High-risk patients often have a relapse within 1-3 years from the end of adjuvant therapy. Low-risk patients may have a relapse later.
Routine follow-up schedules differ across institutions. The optimal follow-up schedules are not known. As an
 
example, at some institutions, high-risk patients undergo a routine follow-up with an abdominal CT scan or MRI every 3-6 months for 3 years during adjuvant therapy (with a tighter clinical follow-up due to the need to manage the side-effects of adjuvant therapy), unless contraindicated, then on cessation of adjuvant therapy every 3 months for 2 years, then every 6 months until 5 years from stopping adjuvant therapy and annually for an additional 5 years.70
For low-risk tumours, the usefulness of a routine follow-up is not known; if selected, this may be carried out with abdominal CT scan or MRI, for example, every 6-12 months for 5 years.
Very low-risk GISTs probably do not require routine follow-up, although the risk is not zero. X-ray exposure is a factor to consider, especially in low-risk GIST, with abdominal MRI being an alternative procedure.71

METHODOLOGY
This CPG has been developed by ESMO in partnership with EURACAN and GENTURIS during a virtual consensus meeting which was held on 5 December 2020. The CPG was developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for CPG development (http://www. esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology). Rec- ommended interventions are intended to correspond to the ‘standard’ approaches for diagnosis, treatment and survivorship on GISTs, according to current consensus among the European and worldwide multidisciplinary sarcoma community of experts. This community was represented by the members of the ESMO Sarcoma Faculty and experts appointed by all institutions belonging to the sarcoma domain of EURACANeGENTURIS. Experimental interventions considered to be beneficial are labelled as ‘investigational’. Other nonstandard approaches which may be proposed to the single patient are labelled as ‘options’ for a shared patientephysician decision in conditions of uncertainty, as long as some supporting evidence (though not conclusive) is available. Algorithms accompanying these guidelines, covering the main typical presentations of disease, are meant to guide the user throughout the text. The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. An ESMO-MCBS table with ESMO-MCBS scores is included in Supplementary Table S1, available at https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005. ESMO-MCBS v1.172 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) since 1 January 2016 or the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) since 1 January 2020 (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/ esmo-mcbs). The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Supplementary Table S2, available at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005.73 ESCAT scores have been defined by the authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working
 
28	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022
 
P. G. Casali et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
Group. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge patient representatives Gerard van Oortmerssen and Marcus Wartenburg from Sarcoma Patients EuroNet (SPAEN), who attended the consensus meeting as observers and contributed the valuable perspectives of patients to the consensus process. The authors thank Louise Green and Richard Lutz of the ESMO Guidelines staff for their support throughout the whole consensus process and Jackie Jones of JJ Medical Communications Ltd for her project management support during the virtual consensus meeting. This support was funded by ESMO. Manuscript editing support was provided by Louise Green and Catherine Evans (ESMO Guidelines staff). Nathan Cherny, Chair of the ESMO-MCBS Working Group, Urani Dafni ESMO-MCBS Working Group Member/ Frontier Science Foundation Hellas and Giota Zygoura of Frontier Science Foundation Hellas provided review and validation of the ESMO-MCBS scores. Nicola Latino (ESMO Scientific Affairs staff) provided coordination and support of the ESMO-MCBS scores and preparation of the ESMO-MCBS table. Dr Joaquin Mateo (Chair of the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group) provided validation support for integration of ESCAT scores into this guideline. Dr Svetlana Jezdic (ESMO Medical Affairs Advisor) provided coordination and support of the ESCAT scores and their presentation in the table.

FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.

DISCLOSURE
PGC has received honoraria for participation in advisory board for Bayer, institutional research funding from Amgen Dompé, Advenchen, Bayer, Blueprint, Deciphera, Eli Lilly, Epizyme, Daiichi, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Karyopharm, Novartis, Pfizer, PharmaMar, SpringWorks, AROG Pharma- ceuticals and Eisai and carried out nonremunerated activ- ities for the Italian Sarcoma Group, European School of Oncology, Federation of Italian Cooperative Groups and Rare Cancers Europe; JYB received research support from Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Roche, GSK, Novartis, Bayer, PharmaMar outside the present work; NA reports non- remunerated leadership and advisory roles for Sociedade Portuguesa de Cirurgia; JB reports no personal financial disclosure, received research grants (institutional) from Eli Lilly, Novartis, Roche, Samsung Bioepis, Paxman Coolers Ltd., Sun Pharma and reports nonremunerated advisory role for Novartis, nonremunerated leadership activities for Immuno-Oncology Society of India, Indian Society of Med- ical and Paediatric Oncology, Teenage and Young Adult Cancer Foundation and Indian Cooperative Oncology Network; SB has received honoraria for participation in
 
advisory boards for Deciphera, Blueprint Medicines, Lilly, Novartis, Daiichi-Sankyo, Plexxikon, Roche, GSK and reports invited speaker fees from Pfizer and PharmaMar, institu- tional research grant from Novartis, performed institutional research as principal investigator (PI) for Daiichi-Sankyo, Roche, Deciphera, Lilly, Novartis, Blueprint Medicines, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), Incyte and carried out non- renumerated activities for Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArm) and is the founding member of German Sarcoma Foundation; RB reports nonrenumerated activities as PI for IRCSS Galeazzi Orthopaedic Institute and IRE-ISG Regina Elena Institute and participation at the Clinical Experience Exchange Meeting, III IDBN National Congress 2019, Italian Association of Medical Oncology (AIOM), IRE-ISG Regina Elena Institute and Lazio Association of Orthopaedic Hospital Traumatologists (A.L.O.T.O.); SBi has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards from Bayer Healthcare, Boehringer Ingelheim, Clinigen, Hoffmann-La Roche, Ipsen, Eli Lilly and Sensorion and re- ports nonremunerated activities for Bayer and membership of the German Paediatric Oncology Society and European Musculoskeletal Oncology Society; SBon has received hon- oraria for advisory board from Nanobiotix and as an invited speaker for PharmaMar, trial research grant from the Institut National du Cancer (INCa); IB has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Roche, Lilly, Sanofi, Pierre Fabre, Ipsen and as an invited speaker for Amgen, BMS, Novartis, Leo Pharma, AstraZeneca and Genesis and is a member of Board of Directors for Hellenic Society of Medical Oncology, Hellenic Society of Sarcomas and Rare Tumors, Hellenic Oncology Research Group (HORG) and reports PI trial research support from Novartis, BMS, Regeneron, MSD, Lilly and Roche; JVMGB receives royalties from UpToDate and Wolters Kluwer, and direct research funding from TRACON pharmaceuticals; KB has received honoraria for expert testimony and advisory boards for Bayer, invited speaker fees and research grant from Eli Lilly, PI for Deciphera and Novartis; TB has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Bayer and Eli Lilly, invited speaker fees from PharmaMar and Novartis; EDÁ has received honoraria for participation in advisory board for Bayer, invited speaker for Lilly, PharmaMar and Roche and institutional research support from Pfizer, Roche and AstraZeneca; APDT has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Bayer and Roche, invited speaker for PharmaMar and Novartis; XGDM has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Ipsen, EUSAPharma, BMS, Pfizer, Roche and PharmaMar and is an invited speaker for Lilly, Astellas Pharma, Eisai and Pfizer and received institutional research grant from Astra Zeneca; ME has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Clinigen and Bayer, consulting fees from Blueprint Medicines, institutional research funding from Novartis; AF has received honoraria for participation in advisory board for Novartis and invited speaker fees for MSD and Amgen; VF has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards and speaker fees for BMS, Novartis and MSD and speaker fees from Pierre Fabre; SG has reported
 

Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	29
 
Annals of Oncology	P. G. Casali et al.

 
institutional research for Blueprint Medicines and is a member of American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and AIOM; HG has reported PI research for Daiichi, Deci- phera and Novartis and co-ordinating PI for Boehringer Ingelheim and AmMax Bio; FG has received honoraria for participation in advisory board for Amgen and expert tes- timony for Deciphera, stock ownership for Atlanthera, li- cencing fees from Zimmer, nonrenumerated activities for 3D-Side and INCa DGOS funding and is a member of the board of NetSarc, the French clinical reference network for soft tissue and visceral sarcomas; GG has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Lilly, Eisai, Merck, Bayer and GSK, invited speaker fees from PharmaMar and Novartis and institutional grants from PharmaMar, Bayer and Novartis; RH has received honoraria from GSK; ABH is a member of Board of Directors for EIT Health UK and Ireland and received or currently receives direct research funding as a PI from Roche, performs work in clinical trials or con- tracted research for the institution and as the Clinical Di- rector of the Oncology and Haematology Directorate, Oxford Cancer Centre; NH has received honoraria as expert testimony and invited speaker from PharmaMar and per- forms work in clinical trials or contracted research for which the author’s institution received financial support from PharmaMar, Lilly, Adaptimmune Therapeutics, AROG Phar- maceuticals, Bayer, Eisai, Lixte, Karyopharm, Deciphera, GSK, Novartis, Blueprint Medicines, Nektar Therapeutics, Forma, Amgen and Daiichi-Sankyo and reports non- remunerated leadership roles for Grupo Español de Inves- tigación en Sarcomas (GEIS) and SELNET and has nonremunerated membership or affiliation with ESMO, Sociedad Española de Oncología Médica (SEOM), ASCO, Connective Tissue Oncology Society (CTOS) and European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC); PH has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Pfizer, Roche and GSK, invited speaker fees from PharmaMar and Lilly, clinical expert fees from Boehringer Ingelheim and institutional research funding for clinical trials from Siemens, Novartis, Blueprint Medicines and meeting sponsorship from PEKKIP Oncology and reports carrying out nonremunerated activities for the German Sarcoma Foundation (DSS), German Interdisciplinary Sar- coma Group (GISG) and Interdisciplinary Working Party on Sarcomas (IAWS) of the German Cancer Society (DKG) and advisory role for the German Cancer Aid (DKH) Committee on Health Technology Assessment and Sarcoma Patients EuroNet (SPAEN); HJ has received honoraria for participa- tion in advisory boards for Orion Pharma, Neutron Thera- peutics and Maud Kuistila Memorial Foundation and had full time or part time employment at Orion Pharma (until 31 August 2020), stocks in Orion Pharma and Sartar Thera- peutics; RLJ has received honoraria for expert testimony consultancy for Adaptimmune, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Blueprint Medicines, Clinigen, Eisai, Epizyme, Daiichi, Deci- phera, Immune Design, Lilly, SpringWorks, Tracon, UpTo- Date, PharmaMar and is on the advisory board for Athenex and received institutional research grant from MSD; CJ has received travel grants from Ipsen and PharmaMar; BK
 
has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Bayer, Blueprint Medicines, Boehringer Ingelheim, SpringWorks, GSK and PharmaMar, institutional research support from PharmaMar and SpringWorks and is a mem- ber of EORTC and Chair of the EORTC soft tissue and bone sarcoma group (STBSG); AK has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Daiichi-Sankyo and Otsuka and invited speaker fees from Novartis, Taiho and Eisai; KK has received honoraria for participation in the advisory board for Bayer and expert testimony for Eli Lilly and Roche; ALC has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Deciphera and Lilly and invited speaker fees from PharmaMar and Bayer; EL received honoraria from SpringWorks Therapeutics for scientific advisory board participation and is a member of the European Reference Network GENTURIS; AL has received institutional research grants from Johnson & Johnson, Alphamed, Medacta and ImplanTec and reports nonremunerated activities for Eu- ropean Musculoskeletal Society (EMSOS), Austrian Society of Orthopaedic Surgeons (OGO) and membership of CTOS; AL-P has received honoraria as invited speaker for Phar- maMar, institutional research funding from the Spanish Health Ministry, reported nonrenumerated activities as PI for PharmaMar, Cebiotex, Deciphera, Lilly, GSK, Daiichi, Epizyme, Advenchen Laboratories, Novartis, Karyopharm, Blueprint medicines, GEIS and other activity for EORTC; JM- B has received honoraria for expert testimony for Lilly, PharmaMar, Eisai, Bayer, invited speaker fee from Pharma- Mar and carried out institutional research for PharmaMar, Eisai, Novartis, Immix Biopharma, Lixte, Karyopharm, Bayer, Celgene, Pfizer, BMS, Blueprint Medicines, Deciphera, Nek- tar Therapeutics, Forma, Amgen, Daiichi-Sankyo, Lilly, AROG Pharmaceuticals, Adaptimmune and GSK; OM has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for MSD, Megapharm, AstraZeneca, Takeda and ProGenetics and invited speaker fees from MSD and Roche; CM has per- formed nonremunerated activities for International Cancer Imaging Society and EORTC STBSG; OMi has received hon- oraria for participation in advisory boards for Bayer, Blue- print Medicines, MSD, Pfizer, invited speaker fees from BMS, Eli-Lilly, Ipsen, Roche and Servier and institutional research for Blueprint Medicines, Bayer, Epizyme and Eli-Lilly; EP has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for SynOx, Daiichi-Sankyo and Deciphera Pharmaceuticals and invited speaker fees from Peer View Educational; MAP has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Roche, invited speaker fees from Eli- Lilly, Pfizer and Novartis and expert testimony from Blue- prints Medicine and institutional research grant from Novartis; SP-N has received honoraria for participation in advisory board for Immunocore; PR has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Bayer, Clinigen, Roche, MSD, Deciphera, Mundibiopharma, PharmaMar, Blueprint Medicines, invited speaker fees from Lilly, Phar- maMar and institutional research for PharmaMar, Kar- yopharm, SpringWorks, AROG Pharmaceuticals, Blueprint, Deciphera, Amgen, Astellas, Epizyme, Lilly, MSD, Pfizer, Novartis and Philogen and has membership of the German
 

30	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022
 
P. G. Casali et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
Sarcoma Foundation; PRu has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for MSD, BMS, Pierre Fabre, Merck, Sanofi, Blueprint Medicines, invited speaker fees from MSD, BMS, Pierre Fabre, Merck, Sanofi, Novartis and institutional research funding from Pfizer, BMS and reports carrying out nonremunerated activities for the Polish Soci- ety of Surgical Oncology and ASCO; MS has received hon- oraria for travel grant from PharmaMar and writing engagement for Lilly; SS has reported a research grant from Johnson & Johnson and research funding from Roche Austria; PS has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Deciphera, Blueprint Medicines, Boeh- ringer Ingelheim, Ellipses Pharma, Transgene, Exelixis, Medscape, Guided Clarity, Ysios, Modus Outcomes, Studie- centrum voor Kernenergie, Curio Science and institutional honoraria for advisory boards for Blueprint Medicines, El- lipses Pharma, IntelliSphere, expert testimony for Advanced Medical/Teladoc Health and institutional research funding from CoBioRes NV, Eisai, G1 Therapeutics, Novartis and PharmaMar; SSl is the Chair of Centre for Personalised Cancer Treatment and Route Personalised Medicine, Dutch Science Agenda, a member of supervisory board for Sky- lineDx and Scientific advisory committee Pan-Cancer T BV; SJS has received honoraria for participation in advisory board for GSK; KSH reports nonrenumerated activity for CTOS as President 2020 and membership of the Scandina- vian Sarcoma Group; MAJvdS has performed work in clinical trials or contracted research for which the institution received financial support from Daiichi Sankyo, implantcast and CarboFix; WTAvdG has received institutional honoraria for participation in advisory boards of Bayer and GSK, institutional research grants from Novartis and Lilly and performed consultancy work for SpringWorks; WJvH has received institutional honoraria for participation in advisory board for Belpharma, invited speaker fees from Amgen and reports expert testimony for Sanofi and MSD and personal travel grant from Novartis and institutional research grant from BMS; TF reports institutional research funding from the Foundation ARC and Ligue Régionale contre le Cancer and leadership role for ERN GENTURIS; AG has received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for Novartis, Pfizer, Bayer, Lilly, PharmaMar, SpringWorks and Nanobiotix and is an invited speaker for Lilly, PharmaMar and reports research grant from PharmaMar; SSta has received hono- raria for participation in advisory boards for Bayer, Deci- phera, Eli Lilly, Daiichi, MaxiVAX, Novartis, invited speaker fees from GSK and PharmaMar, expert testimony fee from Bavarian Nordic and Epizyme and institutional research funding from Amgen Dompé, Advenchen, Bayer, Blueprint Medicines, Deciphera, Eli Lilly, Epizyme, Daiichi, GSK, Kar- yopharm, Novartis, Pfizer, PharmaMar, SpringWorks and Hutchinson MediPharma International Inc. and carried out nonremunerated activities for CTOS, Chordoma Foundation, Epithelioid Haemangioendothelioma Foundation, Desmoid Foundation, EORTC STBSG and Italian Sarcoma Group Onlus. AB, AD, AFer, AMF, PJ, DAK, FLG, ABM, MM, CMo, RP,
AAS, CS, DS, AT and MU have declared no conﬂicts of interests.
 
REFERENCES
1.	WHO Classification of Tumours Editorial Board. Soft Tissue and Bone Tumours. 5th ed. Lyon, France: IARC; 2020.
2.	Gronchi A, Miah AB, Dei Tos AP, et al. Soft tissue and visceral sarcomas: ESMO-EURACAN-GENTURIS Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2022;32(11):1348-1365.
3.	Nilsson B, Bumming P, Meis-Kindblom JM, et al. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: the incidence, prevalence, clinical course, and prog- nostication in the preimatinib mesylate era e a population-based study in western Sweden. Cancer. 2005;103(4):821-829.
4.	Søreide K, Sandvik OM, Søreide JA, et al. Global epidemiology of gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST): a systematic review of population-based cohort studies. Cancer Epidemiol. 2016;40:39-46.
5.	van der Graaf WTA, Tielen R, Bonenkamp JJ, et al. Nationwide trends in the incidence and outcome of patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumour in the imatinib era. Br J Surg. 2018;105(8):1020-1027.
6.	Pappo AS, Janeway KA. Pediatric gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2009;23(1):15-34. vii.
7.	Zhang L, Smyrk TC, Young WF Jr, et al. Gastric stromal tumors in Carney triad are different clinically, pathologically, and behaviorally from sporadic gastric gastrointestinal stromal tumors: findings in 104 cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010;34(1):53-64.
8.	Gaal J, Stratakis CA, Carney JA, et al. SDHB immunohistochemistry: a useful tool in the diagnosis of Carney-Stratakis and Carney triad gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Mod Pathol. 2011;24(1):147-151.
9.	Pasini B, McWhinney SR, Bei T, et al. Clinical and molecular genetics of patients with the Carney-Stratakis syndrome and germline mutations of the genes coding for the succinate dehydrogenase subunits SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008;16(1):79-88.
10.	Miettinen M, Fetsch JF, Sobin LH, et al. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors in patients with neurofibromatosis 1: a clinicopathologic and molecular genetic study of 45 cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 2006;30(1): 90-96.
11.	Maeyama H, Hidaka E, Ota H, et al. Familial gastrointestinal stromal tumor with hyperpigmentation: association with a germline mutation of the c-kit gene. Gastroenterology. 2001;120(1):210-215.
12.	Manley PN, Abu-Abed S, Kirsch R, et al. Familial PDGFRA-mutation syndrome: somatic and gastrointestinal phenotype. Hum Pathol. 2018;76:52-57.
13.	Rubin BP, Blanke CD, Demetri GD, et al. Protocol for the examination of specimens from patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2010;134(2):165-170.
14.	Novelli M, Rossi S, Rodriguez-Justo M, et al. DOG1 and CD117 are the antibodies of choice in the diagnosis of gastrointestinal stromal tu- mours. Histopathology. 2010;57(2):259-270.
15.	Brenca M, Rossi S, Polano M, et al. Transcriptome sequencing identifies ETV6-NTRK3 as a gene fusion involved in GIST. J Pathol. 2016;238(4): 543-549.
16.	Rossi S, Gasparotto D, Miceli R, et al. KIT, PDGFRA, and BRAF muta- tional spectrum impacts on the natural history of imatinib-naive localized GIST: a population-based study. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015;39(7):922-930.
17.	Wozniak A, Rutkowski P, Schöffski P, et al. Tumor genotype is an in- dependent prognostic factor in primary gastrointestinal stromal tu- mors of gastric origin: a European multicenter analysis based on ConticaGIST. Clin Cancer Res. 2014;20(23):6105-6116.
18.	Miettinen M, Lasota J. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: review on morphology, molecular pathology, prognosis, and differential diag- nosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006;130(10):1466-1478.
19.	Miettinen M, Lasota J. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: pathology and prognosis at different sites. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2006;23(2):70-83.
20.	Gold JS, Gonen M, Gutierrez A, et al. Development and validation of a prognostic nomogram for recurrence-free survival after complete surgical resection of localised primary gastrointestinal stromal tumour: a retrospective analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10(11):1045-1052.
21.	Joensuu H, Vehtari A, Riihimaki J, et al. Risk of recurrence of gastro- intestinal stromal tumour after surgery: an analysis of pooled population-based cohorts. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(3):265-274.
 

Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	31
 
Annals of Oncology	P. G. Casali et al.

 
22.	Rossi S, Miceli R, Messerini L, et al. Natural history of imatinib-naive GISTs: a retrospective analysis of 929 cases with long-term follow-up and development of a survival nomogram based on mitotic index and size as continuous variables. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011;35(11):1646-1656.
23.	Alessandrino F, Tirumani SH, Jagannathan JP, et al. Imaging surveillance of gastrointestinal stromal tumour: current recommendation by Na- tional Comprehensive Cancer Network and European Society of Medical Oncology-European Reference Network for Rare Adult Solid Cancers. Clin Radiol. 2019;74(10):746-755.
24.	Stroobants S, Goeminne J, Seegers M, et al. 18FDG-positron emission tomography for the early prediction of response in advanced soft tissue sarcoma treated with imatinib mesylate (Glivec). Eur J Cancer. 2003;39(14):2012-2020.
25.	Ohtani H, Maeda K, Noda E, et al. Meta-analysis of laparoscopic and open surgery for gastric gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Anticancer Res. 2013;33(11):5031-5041.
26.	Gronchi A, Bonvalot S, Poveda Velasco A, et al. Quality of surgery and outcome in localized gastrointestinal stromal tumors treated within an international intergroup randomized clinical trial of adjuvant imatinib. JAMA Surg. 2020;155(6):e200397.
27.	Joensuu H, Eriksson M, Sundby Hall K, et al. Adjuvant imatinib for high- risk GI stromal tumor: analysis of a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(3):244-250.
28.	Dematteo RP, Ballman KV, Antonescu CR, et al. Adjuvant imatinib mesylate after resection of localised, primary gastrointestinal stromal tumour: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2009;373(9669):1097-1104.
29.	Casali PG, Le Cesne A, Velasco AP, et al. Final analysis of the ran- domized trial on imatinib as an adjuvant in localized gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) from the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group (STBSG), the Australasian Gastro-Intestinal Trials Group (AGITG), UNICANCER, French Sarcoma Group (FSG), Italian Sarcoma Group (ISG), and Spanish Group for Research on Sarcomas (GEIS). Ann Oncol. 2021;32(4):533-541.
30.	Gronchi A, Judson I, Nishida T, et al. Adjuvant treatment of GIST with imatinib: solid ground or still quicksand? A comment on behalf of the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group, the Italian Sarcoma Group, the NCRI Sarcoma Clinical Studies Group (UK), the Japanese Study Group on GIST, the French Sarcoma Group and the Spanish Sarcoma Group (GEIS). Eur J Cancer. 2009;45(7):1103-1106.
31.	Joensuu H, Wardelmann E, Sihto H, et al. Effect of KIT and PDGFRA mutations on survival in patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumors treated with adjuvant imatinib: an exploratory analysis of a random- ized clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3:602-609.
32.	Corless CL, Ballman KV, Antonescu CR, et al. Pathologic and molecular features correlate with long-term outcome after adjuvant therapy of resected primary GI stromal tumor: the ACOSOG Z9001 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(15):1563-1570.
33.	Debiec-Rychter M, Sciot R, Le Cesne A, et al. KIT mutations and dose selection for imatinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stro- mal tumours. Eur J Cancer. 2006;42(8):1093-1103.
34.	Heinrich MC, Owzar K, Corless CL, et al. Correlation of kinase genotype and clinical outcome in the North American Intergroup Phase III Trial of imatinib mesylate for treatment of advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumor: CALGB 150105 Study by Cancer and Leukemia Group B and Southwest Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(33):5360-5367.
35.	Heinrich MC, Corless CL, Demetri GD, et al. Kinase mutations and imatinib response in patients with metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21(23):4342-4349.
36.	Hølmebakk T, Bjerkehagen B, Boye K, et al. Definition and clinical significance of tumour rupture in gastrointestinal stromal tumours of the small intestine. Br J Surg. 2016;103(6):684-691.
37.	Boye K, Berner JM, Hompland I, et al. Genotype and risk of tumour rupture in gastrointestinal stromal tumour. Br J Surg. 2018;105(2): e169-e175.
38.	Hølmebakk T, Hompland I, Bjerkehagen B, et al. Recurrence-free sur- vival after resection of gastric gastrointestinal stromal tumors classified according to a strict definition of tumor rupture: a population-based study. Ann Surg Oncol. 2018;25(5):1133-1139.
39.	 
Hohenberger P, Ronellenfitsch U, Oladeji O, et al. Pattern of recurrence in patients with ruptured primary gastrointestinal stromal tumour. Br J Surg. 2010;97(12):1854-1859.
40.	Eisenberg BL, Harris J, Blanke CD, et al. Phase II trial of neoadjuvant/adjuvant imatinib mesylate (IM) for advanced primary and metastatic/recurrent operable gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST): early results of RTOG 0132/ACRIN 6665. J Surg Oncol. 2009;99(1):42-47.
41.	Rutkowski P, Gronchi A, Hohenberger P, et al. Neoadjuvant imatinib in locally advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST): the EORTC STBSG experience. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013;20(9):2937-2943.
42.	Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor Meta-Analysis Group (MetaGIST). Comparison of two doses of imatinib for the treatment of unresectable or metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors: a meta-analysis of 1,640 patients. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(7):1247-1253.
43.	Blanke CD, Demetri GD, von Mehren M, et al. Long-term results from a randomized phase II trial of standard- versus higher-dose imatinib mesylate for patients with unresectable or metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors expressing KIT. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(4):620-625.
44.	Blanke CD, Rankin C, Demetri GD, et al. Phase III randomized, inter- group trial assessing imatinib mesylate at two dose levels in patients with unresectable or metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors expressing the kit receptor tyrosine kinase: S0033. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(4):626-632.
45.	Verweij J, Casali PG, Zalcberg J, et al. Progression-free survival in gastrointestinal stromal tumours with high-dose imatinib: randomised trial. Lancet. 2004;364(9440):1127-1134.
46.	Zalcberg JR, Verweij J, Casali PG, et al. Outcome of patients with advanced gastro-intestinal stromal tumours crossing over to a daily imatinib dose of 800 mg after progression on 400 mg. Eur J Cancer. 2005;41(12):1751-1757.
47.	Farag S, de Geus-Oei LF, van der Graaf WT, et al. Early evaluation of response using 18 F-FDG PET inﬂuences management in gastrointes- tinal stromal tumor patients treated with neoadjuvant imatinib. J Nucl Med. 2018;59(2):194-196.
48.	Heinrich MC, Jones RL, von Mehren M, et al. Avapritinib in advanced PDGFRA D842V-mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumour (NAVIGATOR): a multicentre, open-label, phase 1 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(7):935- 946.
49.	Janeway KA, Albritton KH, van den Abbeele AD, et al. Sunitinib treat- ment in pediatric patients with advanced GIST following failure of imatinib. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2009;52(7):767-771.
50.	Trent JC, Beach J, Burgess MA, et al. A two-arm phase II study of temozolomide in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tu- mors and other soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer. 2003;98(12):2693-2699.
51.	Drilon A, Laetsch TW, Kummar S, et al. Efficacy of larotrectinib in TRK fusion-positive cancers in adults and children. N Engl J Med. 2018;378(8):731-739.
52.	Mateo J, Chakravarty D, Dienstmann R, et al. A framework to rank genomic alterations as targets for cancer precision medicine: the ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets (ESCAT). Ann Oncol. 2018;29(9):1895-1902.
53.	Falchook GS, Trent JC, Heinrich MC, et al. BRAF mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumor: first report of regression with BRAF inhibitor dabrafe- nib (GSK2118436) and whole exomic sequencing for analysis of ac- quired resistance. Oncotarget. 2013;4(2):310-315.
54.	Le Cesne A, Ray-Coquard I, Bui BN, et al. Discontinuation of imatinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumours after 3 years of treatment: an open-label multicentre randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2010;11(10):942-949.
55.	Mussi C, Ronellenfitsch U, Jakob J, et al. Post-imatinib surgery in advanced/metastatic GIST: is it worthwhile in all patients? Ann Oncol. 2010;21(2):403-408.
56.	Raut CP, Posner M, Desai J, et al. Surgical management of advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors after treatment with targeted systemic therapy using kinase inhibitors. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(15):2325-2331.
57.	Wang D, Zhang Q, Blanke CD, et al. Phase II trial of neoadjuvant/ adjuvant imatinib mesylate for advanced primary and metastatic/ recurrent operable gastrointestinal stromal tumors: long-term follow-
 

32	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022
 
P. G. Casali et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
up results of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 0132. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012;19(4):1074-1080.
58.	Bauer S, Rutkowski P, Hohenberger P, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with GIST undergoing metastasectomy in the era of imatinib e analysis of prognostic factors (EORTC-STBSG collaborative study). Eur J Surg Oncol. 2014;40(4):412-419.
59.	Du CY, Zhou Y, Song C, et al. Is there a role of surgery in patients with recurrent or metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumours responding to imatinib: a prospective randomised trial in China. Eur J Cancer. 2014;50(10):1772-1778.
60.	Demetri GD, van Oosterom AT, Garrett CR, et al. Efficacy and safety of sunitinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumour after failure of imatinib: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2006;368(9544):1329-1338.
61.	George S, Blay JY, Casali PG, et al. Clinical evaluation of continuous daily dosing of sunitinib malate in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stro- mal tumour after imatinib failure. Eur J Cancer. 2009;45(11):1959-1968.
62.	Demetri GD, Reichardt P, Kang YK, et al. Efficacy and safety of regor- afenib for advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumours after failure of imatinib and sunitinib (GRID): an international, multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2013;381(9863):295-302.
63.	Blay JY, Serrano C, Heinrich MC, et al. Ripretinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumours (INVICTUS): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(7):923-934.
64.	Kang YK, Ryu MH, Yoo C, et al. Resumption of imatinib to control metastatic or unresectable gastrointestinal stromal tumours after failure of imatinib and sunitinib (RIGHT): a randomised, placebo- controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(12):1175-1182.
65.	Mir O, Cropet C, Toulmonde M, et al. Pazopanib plus best supportive care versus best supportive care alone in advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumours resistant to imatinib and sunitinib (PAZOGIST): a randomised, multicentre, open-label phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(5):632-641.
66.	 
Schöffski P, Mir O, Kasper B, et al. Activity and safety of the multi- target tyrosine kinase inhibitor cabozantinib in patients with met- astatic gastrointestinal stromal tumour after treatment with imati- nib and sunitinib: European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer phase II trial 1317 ‘CaboGIST’. Eur J Cancer. 2020;134:62-74.
67.	Choi H, Charnsangavej C, Faria SC, et al. Correlation of computed to- mography and positron emission tomography in patients with meta- static gastrointestinal stromal tumor treated at a single institution with imatinib mesylate: proposal of new computed tomography response criteria. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(13):1753-1759.
68.	Le Cesne A, van Glabbeke M, Verweij J, et al. Absence of progression as assessed by response evaluation criteria in solid tumors predicts sur- vival in advanced GI stromal tumors treated with imatinib mesylate: the intergroup EORTC-ISG-AGITG phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(24):3969-3974.
69.	Shankar S, van Sonnenberg E, Desai J, et al. Gastrointestinal stromal tumor: new nodule-within-a-mass pattern of recurrence after partial response to imatinib mesylate. Radiology. 2005;235(3):892-898.
70.	Joensuu H, Martin-Broto J, Nishida T, et al. Follow-up strategies for patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumour treated with or without adjuvant imatinib after surgery. Eur J Cancer. 2015;51(12):1611-1617.
71.	D’Ambrosio L, Palesandro E, Boccone P, et al. Impact of a risk-based follow-up in patients affected by gastrointestinal stromal tumour. Eur J Cancer. 2017;78:122-132.
72.	Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J, et al. ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(10):2340-2366.
73.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144 (Adapted from: Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious dis- eases. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 1994: 18:421).
 






























Volume 33 ■ Issue 1 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.09.005	33
