
 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
 
Annals of Oncology 29 (Supplement 4): iv238–iv255, 2018 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy308
 

 

 

A. Vogel1, A. Cervantes2, I. Chau3, B. Daniele4, J. M. Llovet5,6,7, T. Meyer8,9, J.-C. Nault10, U. Neumann11,
J. Ricke12, B. Sangro13, P. Schirmacher14, C. Verslype15, C. J. Zech16, D. Arnold17 & E. Martinelli18, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany; 2Department of Medical Oncology, Biomedical Research Institute INCLIVA, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain; 3Department of Medicine, Royal Marsden Hospital, Surrey, UK; 4Dipartimento di Oncologia, A. O. G. Rummo, Benevento, Italy; 5Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Mount Sinai Liver Cancer Program, New York, USA; 6Barcelona-Cl´ınic Liver Cancer Group (BCLC), Unitat d’Hepatologia, Institut d’Investigacions Biome`diques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Hospital Cl´ınic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona; 7Institucio´ Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avanc¸ats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain; 8Oncology, Royal Free Hospital, London; 9UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK; 10Service d’he´patologie, Hoˆpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France; 11Klinik fu¨ r Allgemein- und Viszeralchirurgie, Medizinische Fakulta¨t der RWTH Aachen; 12Klinik und Poliklinik fu¨ r Radiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universita¨t Mu¨ nchen, Munich, Germany; 13Liver Unit, Clinica Universidad de Navarra- IDISNA and CIBEREHD, Pamplona, Spain; 14Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany; 15Campus Gasthuisberg, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 16Klinik fu¨ r Radiologie und Nuklearmedizin Universita¨t Basel, Basel, Switzerland; 17Department Oncology, Section Hematology and Palliative Care AK Altona, Asklepios Tumorzentrum Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany; 18Faculty of Medicine, Universita` della Campania L. Vanvitelli Naples, Caserta, Italy

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: August 2018.


 

 
The incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been rising worldwide over the last 20 years and is expected to increase until 2030 in some countries including the United States, while in other countries, such as Japan, the incidence has started to decline [1–3]. In 2012, liver cancer represented the fifth most common cancer in men (554 000 new cases) and the ninth in women (228 000 new cases) and the second most common cause of cancer-related death (746 000 estimated deaths), worldwide [3]. The incidence varies from 3/100 000 in Western countries, to 78.1/100 000 in Mongolia, with the highest incidence in Africa and Asia, mapping the geo- graphical distribution of viral hepatitis B (HBV) and hepatitis C (HCV), the most important causes of chronic liver disease and HCC [4]. In Europe, in 2012 the estimated incidence rate was 10.0 in men and 3.3 in women per 100 000, respectively, while the esti- mated mortality rate was 9.1 and 3.3 per 100 000 in men and women, respectively [3]. The incidence of HCC shows a strong male preponderance and increases progressively with advancing age in all populations. The association of chronic liver disease and HCC represents the basis for preventive strategies, including uni- versal vaccination at birth against HBV [I, A] [5] and early antiviral treatment of viral HBC and HCV [III, A] [6–8].
The prevalence of obesity and type 2 diabetes has greatly increased in the past decades, leading to a rising incidence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and non-alcoholic
 

steatohepatitis (NASH), which can lead to fibrosis and cirrhosis and, eventually, HCC [9]. HCC related to NAFLD/NASH is probably underestimated [10] and is expected to rise in the future, possibly overtaking the other aetiologies in some areas of the world [11]. A significant proportion of patients with NAFLD/ NASH-associated HCC do not have histological evidence of cirrhosis [12].
The control of other risk factors for chronic liver disease and cancer is more difficult to implement, such as cutting down on the consumption of alcohol and programmes aiming at a health- ier lifestyle in the light of the obesity pandemic [13, 14]. In Africa, reduction of exposure to aflatoxin B1, especially in HBV-infected
individuals, may lower the risk of HCC. HCC may evolve from subclasses of adenomas; in < 10% of cases HCC occurs in an otherwise normal liver.


 
Surveillance of HCC involves the repeated application of screen- ing tools in patients at risk for HCC and aims for the reduction in mortality of this patient population. The success of surveillance is influenced by the incidence of HCC in the target population, the availability and acceptance of efficient diagnostic tests and the availability of effective treatment. Cost-effectiveness studies sug- gest surveillance of HCC is warranted in all cirrhotic patients
 

VC   The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
Table 1. Diagnostic work-up

History and clinical examination
Risk factors for chronic liver disease: i.v. drug abuse, alcohol intake, metabolic syndrome (obesity, diabetes, arterial hypertension) Symptoms and signs of chronic liver disease (jaundice, ascites, encephalopathy, bleeding, splenomegaly)
PS (distinguish cancer-related symptoms of recent onset with long-standing symptoms associated with cirrhosis) and nutritional state
Laboratory analysis
Aetiology of liver disease: HBV (at least HBsAg and anti-HBc), HCV (at least anti-HCV), iron status, autoimmune disease Liver function: prothrombin, albumin, bilirubin
Complete blood cell count including platelets Tumour marker: serum AFP
Assessment of portal hypertension
Upper endoscopy: varices and/or hypertensive gastropathy
Optional: transjugular measurement of hepatic-venous pressure gradient
Imaging studies
Liver dynamic (multiple phase) MRI or CT studies for diagnosis and evaluation of tumour extent inside the liver (number and size of nodules, vascular invasion, extrahepatic spread)
CEUS can also be used for the non-invasive diagnosis of HCC if CT scan or MRI are not possible, but is not considered appropriate for tumour staging CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis to rule out extrahepatic spread
Tumour biopsy
Useful for nodules with non-diagnostic at imaging Required to diagnose HCC in non-cirrhotic liver
Should be carried out according to national or institutional policy in all clinical trials and may support centre-based innovative treatment approaches Ideally, should evaluate tumour and non-tumour tissue when used for scientiﬁc purposes

AFP, alpha foetoprotein; CEUS, contrast-enhanced ultrasound; CT, computed tomography; HBc, hepatitis B core antibody; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HCV, hepatitis C virus; i.v., intravenous; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PS, performance status.



 
irrespective of its aetiology [15], as long as liver function and comorbidities allow curative or palliative treatments [III, A]. Surveillance of non-cirrhotic, hepatitis-infected patients should also be considered in chronic HBV carriers or HCV-infected patients with bridging fibrosis (F3, numerous septa without cir- rhosis) [III, A], which are at higher risk than the general popula- tion. Specifically in Asian patients, serum HBV-DNA above 10 000 copies/mL was associated with a higher annual risk (above 0.2%/year) compared with patients with a lower viral load [16]. Patients with HCV infection and advanced fibrosis remain at increased risk for HCC even after achieving sustained virological response following antiviral treatment [III, A] [8] and, thus, should remain in a surveillance programme.
Japanese cohort studies have shown that surveillance by ab- dominal ultrasound (US) resulted in an average size of the detected tumours of 1.6 6 0.6 cm, with < 2% of the cases exceed- ing 3 cm [17]. In the Western world and in less experienced
centres, the sensitivity of finding early-stage HCC by US is con- siderably less effective [18]. There are no data to support the use of contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) or con- trast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (CEMRI) for sur- veillance. Adding the determination of serum alpha foetoprotein (AFP) to US can lead to a 6% gain in the early HCC detection rate, but at the price of false-positive results and of a worse cost- effectiveness ratio [19]. A randomised controlled trial (RCT) of Chinese   patients   with   chronic   HBV   infection   compared
 
surveillance (US and serum AFP measurements every 6 months) versus no surveillance [20]. Despite low compliance with the sur- veillance program (55%), HCC-related mortality was reduced by 37% in the surveillance arm. Considering the most appropriate surveillance interval, a randomised study comparing a 3- versus 6-month schedule failed to detect any differences [21].
Surveillance of patients at risk for HCC should be carried out
by abdominal US every 6 months with or without AFP [II, A].


The diagnosis of HCC is based on histological analysis and/or contrast-enhanced imaging findings [III, A]. The diagnostic work-up of a patient with an HCC-suspicious nodule is given in Table 1.

Diagnosis by imaging
In patients with liver cirrhosis and specific imaging criteria, a for- mal pathological proof is not mandatory for diagnosis and the clinician can rely on the contrast-enhanced imaging criteria for lesion characterisation [22–24]. These criteria require a multi- phasic CECT or CEMRI. The diagnosis can be established if the typical vascular hallmarks of HCC (hypervascularity in the arter- ial phase with washout in the portal venous or delayed phase) are
identified in a nodule of > 1 cm diameter using one of these two
 
Table 2. CT/MRI LI-RADS diagnostic table

Untreated observation without pathological proof in patient at high risk for HCC
Deﬁnitely benign: LR-1 Probably benign: LR-2
Not categorisable, due to image degradation or omission: LR-NC Deﬁnite tumour in vein (TIV): LR-TIV
Probably or deﬁnitely malignant but not HCC speciﬁc (e.g. if targetoid): LR-M
Otherwise, use CT/MRI diagnostic table below Intermediate probability of malignancy: LR-3 Probably HCC: LR-4
Deﬁnitely HCC: LR-5
Arterial phase hyperenhancement (APHE)	No APHE	APHE (not rim)
Observation size (mm)	< 20	≥ 20	< 10	10-19	≥ 20
 
Count major features: ‘Washout’ (not peripheral) Enhancing ‘capsule’ Threshold growtha
 
None	LR-3	LR-3	LR-3	LR-3	LR-4 One	LR-3	LR-4	LR-4	LR-4/LR-5b	LR-5
≥ Two	LR-4	LR-4	LR-4	LR-5	LR-5
 
aThreshold growth deﬁnition:
≥ 50% increase in size in ≤ 6 months, OR
Previously unseen on CT or MRI, now ≥ 10 mm, in ≤ 24 months.
bObservations in this cell are categorised based on one additional major feature: LR-4 if enhancing ‘capsule’; LR-5 if non-peripheral ‘washout’ OR threshold growth.
CT, computed tomography; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; LI-RADS, Liver Imaging Reporting and Data System; LR, liver resection; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.



 
modalities [III, A]. Compared with multiple detector CT (MDCT), multiphasic MRI offers a moderate increase in sensitiv- ity for diagnosing HCC based on the typical vascular hallmarks [III, B] [24–27]. Serum AFP has no role in the diagnostic algo- rithm [III, A].
Based on techniques such as diffusion-weighted imaging and the use of hepatobiliary contrast agents, MRI may identify and stratify nodules as high-risk nodules (either HCC not displaying the typical imaging hallmarks features or high-grade dysplastic nodules) [IV, B] [28–31]. However, the impact of identification of additional nodules by diffusion-weighted imaging and hepato- biliary contrast agents on the therapeutic algorithm remains un- clear and switching to palliative treatments after identification of potential premalignant nodules by these new techniques should be avoided. New imaging criteria for HCC diagnosis called CT/ MRI  LI-RADSVR        v2018  (Liver  Imaging  Reporting  and  Data System) include arterial phase enhancement, tumour size, wash- out, enhancing capsule and threshold growth and have been pro- posed to improve the diagnosis of HCC, especially for small nodules (Table 2) [32, 33].
For contrast-enhanced US (CEUS), an overlap between the vascular profile of HCC and cholangiocarcinoma (CC) has been described. However, recent data suggest CEUS as a suitable tech- nique to diagnose HCC non-invasively in the setting of liver cir- rhosis [IV, B] [34–36]. The typical hallmarks for HCC at CEUS differ slightly to those of CT/MRI; at CEUS, hallmarks are arterial
hyper-enhancement followed by late (> 60 s) washout of a mild
degree.
 
Angiography and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tom- ography (FDG-PET) scan are not recommended for HCC diag- nosis. When tumour biopsy fails to demonstrate a correlate for a focal lesion, a second tumour biopsy, a different contrast- enhanced imaging modality or (if amenable) direct resection of the lesion may be considered according to tumour size [IV, B]. If the patient is a candidate for resection that can be carried out with an acceptable morbidity and mortality risk, then either bi- opsy or direct resection may be an option.

Diagnosis by pathology
Pathological diagnosis of HCC is based on a biopsy or a surgical specimen of the tumour. Concomitant analysis of the non- tumour liver may be useful in order to define its status and poten- tial causative diseases. Assessment of resection and explant speci- men follows the valid TNM (tumour, node, metastasis) classification including resection margin evaluation. Usually tu- mour grade is provided, but currently no uniform grading scheme is used worldwide and data on the independent prognos- tic value are inconclusive.
Histopathological diagnosis of tumour biopsies relies on standard [e.g. haemotoxylin and eosin (H&E)] and special stains (e.g. reticulin), and—if required—immunohistochemistry (IHC). It should address different challenges: morphologically, highly differentiated HCC must be distinguished from benign/ premalignant lesions (dysplastic nodules, hepatocellular aden- oma, focal nodular hyperplasia). In particular, poorly differenti- ated HCC should be distinguished from intrahepatic CC,
 
combined HCC/CC and some types of metastases (e.g. lung can- cer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, breast cancer, neu- roendocrine tumours). For this reason, histological analyses may be supplemented by IHC for lineage-specific markers. It is im- portant to distinguish combined HCC/CC from HCC due to the different therapeutic modalities; however, the mixed differenti- ation features might not be visible in the biopsy. In addition, sig- nificant expression of cytokeratin 19 (CK19) has been evaluated and considered as a sign of poor prognosis in HCC [IV, B].
In highly differentiated HCC, definitive signs of malignancy (interstitial or vascular invasion) are frequently absent from bi- opsy. Further consented histological (trabecular alterations— more than two cell broad trabeculae, pseudoglands, reticulin loss, capsule formation) and cytological criteria (increased nuclear/ cytoplasmic ratio, i.e. ‘nuclear crowding’, increased cytoplasmic basophilia) support HCC diagnosis [III, B] [37]. IHC should be carried out in unclear cases: capillarisation of sinusoids could be assessed using CD34 IHC [IV, B] [37]. Further immunohisto- chemical markers have been shown to improve the diagnosis of highly differentiated HCC, including glutamine synthetase, glypi- can 3, general stress protein (CTC), enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) and heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) [IV, B]. A combin- ation of the three markers glutamine synthetase, glypican 3 and HSP70 has been consented as a diagnostic panel (2/3 marker positivity has 70% sensitivity and 100% specificity for HCC) and the use of further markers seems to increase the sensitivity [IV, B] [38]. Moreover, histological subtypes of HCC have been defined (e.g. fibrolamellar, chromophobe, macrotrabecular massive) which specifically correlate with clinical and molecular features [39, 40], which may have future clinical impact.
It is now well accepted that the potential risks of tumour bi- opsy, bleeding and needle track seeding, are infrequent, manage- able and do not affect the course of the disease or overall survival (OS) and, therefore, should not be seen as a reason to abstain from diagnostic liver biopsy. In a comprehensive meta-analysis, the risk of tumour seeding after liver biopsy was reported to be 2.7%, with a median time interval between biopsy and seeding of 17 months [41], but even lower rates are expected in experienced centres. It was reported that needle track seeding can be treated well (e.g. by excision or radiation) and did not affect outcome of oncological treatment [42] and OS [41]. In a meta-analysis of the bleeding risk, mild bleeding complications ranged around 3%– 4%, while severe bleeding complications, requiring transfusions, were reported in 0.5% of the cases [43].


 
Staging of HCC is important to determine outcome and planning of optimal therapy and includes assessment of tumour extent, AFP level, liver function, portal pressure and clinical performance status (PS) (Table 1) [III, A]. Relevant techniques to evaluate tu- mour extent (number and size of nodules, vascular invasion, extrahepatic spread) include CEMRI or helical CT. CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis is recommended to rule out extrahe- patic spread. There is no justification for routine preoperative bone scintigraphy to detect asymptomatic skeletal metastases in patients with resectable HCC [44] and there are no data in the context of advanced HCC. There is no demonstrated clinical
 
benefit of carrying out FDG-PET scan as a staging modality, des- pite some evidence that there is a correlation of higher FDG up- take with poor differentiation, tumour size, serum AFP levels and microvascular invasion [IV, D] [45, 46].
Liver function is classically assessed by the Child-Pugh scoring system (serum bilirubin, serum albumin, ascites, prothrombin time and hepatic encephalopathy) [III, A]. Within the Child- Pugh A group, measurement of the albumin-bilirubin (ALBI) score (a model incorporating serum albumin and bilirubin levels alone) is able to split that group into good prognosis (ALBI 1) and poor prognosis (ALBI 2), with median survivals of 26 versus
14 months, respectively [IV, B] [47]. A platelet count >
150 × 109 cells/L and a non-invasive liver stiffness measurement
< 20 kPa excludes clinically significant portal hypertension (Baveno VI criteria) [48]. Otherwise, the finding of oesophageal
varices and/or splenomegaly with blood platelet counts of 100 × 109 cells/L suggests clinically important portal hyperten- sion, which can also be measured invasively by the transjugular route (hepatic-venous pressure gradient > 10 mmHg) [III, A].
Several staging systems—incorporating some or all of the
above-mentioned items—have been developed, including TNM, Okuda, Cancer of the Liver Italian Program (CLIP), Japanese Integrated Staging (JIS) Score and the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) system. Every system has advantages and draw- backs. The recently released 8th edition of the TNM system (Table 3) contains changes to the T classifications compared with the previous staging system [49]. The staging system includes microvascular invasion that can only be assessed on pathology and is therefore less useful in clinical practice before treatment decision making. Moreover, a recent validation study pointed to potential problems of heterogeneity in the T2 category and the lack of vascular invasion as a prognostic factor in the T3 group [50]. TNM classification provides a means of standardising histopathological reports in patients treated by resection or transplantation.
The BCLC staging system was developed on the basis of the results of RCTs and cohort studies and links tumour stage, liver function, cancer-related symptoms and PS to an evidence-based treatment algorithm (Table 4). The system identifies those patients with early HCC who may benefit from ablative treatment (stage 0 and A), those at intermediate (stage B) or advanced stage (stage C) who may benefit from intra-arterial or systemic treatments and those with a very poor life expectancy (stage D). Survival without
therapy is > 5 years for stage 0 and A, > 2.5 years for stage B, >
1 year for stage C and ~3 months for stage D [51]. Treatment as- signment of the different stages is discussed below. The aetiology of
co-existent liver disease has not been identified as an independent prognostic factor. Nevertheless, finding a treatable underlying co- existent liver disease may be very relevant, e.g. antiviral treatment in case of HBV, corticosteroid treatment in autoimmune hepatitis or stopping alcohol intake may result in a marked improvement in liver function and improving prognosis.
Liver decompensation (including jaundice, variceal haemor- rhage, ascites or encephalopathy) should be considered a contraindication for any locoregional therapy that may induce subclinical liver damage such as resection, percutaneous ablation or transarterial therapies. The benefit of systemic therapies has not been established in patients with liver decompensation.
 

 


 
   Management of early and intermediate HCC   
Liver resection (LR), orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) and local destruction methods [radiofrequency ablation (RFA) or microwave ablation (MWA)] comprise potentially curative treat- ment modalities for patients with HCC (see Figure 1). Selecting the appropriate treatment for the individual patient remains dif- ficult and there are no randomised phase III trials comparing the efficacy of these three approaches; all evidence is based on cure rates in patient series.
The predominant arterial vascularisation of HCC resulted in the application of intra-arterial administration of chemotherapy (e.g. doxorubicin, cisplatin), embolising material (e.g. coils, gel- atin sponge particles) or radioactive particles. These therapies are generally regarded as palliative treatment options but may pro- vide complete tumour destruction in well-selected candidates.

Liver resection
Single tumours in patients with well-preserved liver function is the mainstay indication for resection, provided a R0 resection (excision whose margins are clear of tumour cells) can be carried out without causing postoperative liver failure due to insufficient reserve in the liver remnant. LR requires a detailed preoperative work-up with the assessment of liver function and future liver remnant volume. The combination of both variables determines the perioperative risk of liver failure and the associated complica- tions. Child-Pugh A patients without significant portal hyperten- sion are considered good candidates for minor/major LRs [III,
 
B]. Child-Pugh C patients are not suitable for surgical therapy. A recent meta-analysis demonstrates that the presence of portal hypertension or Child-Pugh B status might not be an absolute contraindication and provide acceptable results for these cohorts [52, 53]. Therefore, carefully selected patients with Child-Pugh B and/or portal hypertension may be candidates for minor surgical resection [III, A].
Compared with open LR, laparoscopic LR results in reduced intraoperative blood loss, faster postoperative recovery and does not impair oncological outcome [54]. LR in cirrhosis should preferably be carried out as laparoscopic resection [IV, A]. Currently, there is no high-level evidence to recommend surgical resection in cirrhotic HCC patients with advanced tumour bur- den and macrovascular invasion.
After LR, tumour recurrence can be observed in 50%–70% of cases within 5 years following surgery, which constitutes either intrahepatic metastases (often within 2 years following surgery) or a new HCC in the remaining cirrhotic liver (occurring more often beyond 2 years). Even though the vast majority of HCC recurrences occur within the liver as a result of subclinical micro- metastases and vascular invasion from the primary tumour, the extent of surgical resection [anatomical resection (AR) versus non-anatomical wedge resection (NAR)] is still a subject of on- going debate. Theoretically, the systematic removal of the hepatic segment through an AR is considered to be more effective in terms of tumour clearance and eradication of micro-metastases [55]. This, however, is rarely possible in cirrhotic HCC patients for whom tissue-sparing NAR is the procedure of choice to
 
Table 4. BCLC staging and treatment options according to level of evidence and approval status

 
BCLC stage	Treatment
 
Indication constraints based on
 
Alternative treatment	Alternative
 
(standard of care)
 
tumour burden and liver function
 
Not yet EMA-approved
 
treatment
 

 
0– A Single tumour any size or up to 3 nodules ≤ 3 cm
Preserved liver function ECOG PS 0




B	Multinodular
Preserved liver function ECOG PS 0
 
Resection [III, A]	Adequate size and function of
remnant liver Transplantation [III, A]	Size ≤ 5 cm, number ≤ 3
Thermal ablation [III, A]  Size ≤ 3 cm, not adjacent to vessels
or bile duct
TACE [I, A]	Contraindications against resection and thermal ablation. Bridging to transplantation
TACE [I, A]	Size 5–10 cm, tumour nodules accessible to supra-selective catheterisation
 
SBRT [III, C]

HDR brachytherapy [III, C]
SIRT [III, C]




Transplantation [III, A] Resection [III, A]
Systemic therapy (after TACE failure/ refractoriness) [I, A]
SIRT (after TACE failure/ refractoriness) [III, C]
 
C	Portal invasion
 
Sorafenib (ﬁrst-line) [I, A] Child-Pugh A	Lenvatinib (ﬁrst-line) [I, A]	Nivolumab (second- line) [III, B]
 
Extrahepatic spread Preserved liver function ECOG PS 1–2



D	End-stage liver function ECOG PS 3–4
 
Regorafenib (second-line) [I, A]




BSC
 
Child-Pugh A, tolerability to sorafenib Cabozantinib (second-line) [I, A]
Ramucirumab (AFPhigh; second-line) [I, A]
 
Pembrolizumab (second-line) [III, B]
SIRT (liver conﬁned, good liver function, no systemic therapy feasible) [III, C]
 

AFPhigh, elevated alpha foetoprotein; BCLC, Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer; BSC, best supportive care; ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; EMA, European Medicines Agency; HDR, high dose rate; PS, performance status; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; SIRT, selective internal radiotherapy; TACE, transarterial chemoembolisation.


 
reduce the risk of post-operative liver failure [56]. While some groups report superiority of AR, overall conflicting results are reported, and no clear recommendation may be given due to a lack of currently available high-level clinical evidence [57, 58].

Orthotopic liver transplantation
Liver transplantation offers the possibility to cure both the tu- mour and the underlying liver disease [59]. The Milan criteria (one lesion < 5 cm; alternatively, up to three lesions, each < 3 cm; no extrahepatic manifestations; no evidence of macrovascular in- vasion) are currently the benchmark for the selection of patients
with HCC for OLT. OLT is recommended for patients that fit the Milan criteria, for which < 10% recurrence and 70% 5-year sur- vival are expected [II, A] [60]. Among several more liberal pro-
posals [up-to-seven criteria, extended Toronto criteria, University of California San Francisco (UCSF) criteria], only the
UCSF criteria (one tumour ≤ 6.5 cm, three nodules at most with the largest ≤ 4.5 cm and total tumour diameter ≤ 8 cm) were
prospectively validated and showed similar outcome and, as such, may also be considered for OLT in patients with HCC be- yond Milan criteria [III, B] [60, 61]. The use of marginal grafts or
 
living donor liver transplantation could facilitate the treatment of these patients [62–64].
The low availability of liver allografts, however, is a major limitation for OLT, and liver transplant candidates are often confronted with long waiting times, which may be associated with tumour progression beyond the Milan criteria. When a waiting time (> 3 months) is anticipated, patients may be offered resection, local ablation or trans- arterial chemoembolisation (TACE) in order to minimise the risk of
tumour progression and to offer a ‘bridge’ to transplant [III, B].
Adjuvant therapies
Adjuvant therapy is not recommended for HCC patients after OLT, LR or local ablation [I, E]. Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors are used as immunosuppressant to prevent graft rejection in liver transplantation (sirolimus) but have failed to im- prove recurrence-free survival in a recently published phase III study [65]. Similarly, sorafenib did not improve median recurrence-free survival of HCC patients after LR or local ablation [66].
Thermal tumour ablation
Thermal ablation by RFA or MWA may be recommended as first-line treatment in very early-stage disease (BCLC 0) [II, A]. In
 
 
Figure 1. HCC treatment options depending on BCLC stage.
aSee Table 4 for indication constraints based on tumour burden and liver function.
bNot EMA-approved as of August 2018.
BCLC, Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer; BSC, best supportive care; EMA, European Medicines Agency; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; LTX, liver transplantation; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; SIRT, selective internal radiotherapy; TACE, transarterial chemoembolisation.
 
very early-stage disease (tumours < 2 cm diameter), RFA has demonstrated similar outcomes to LR and thus may be recom- mended as first-line treatment, specifically in light of its lesser
invasiveness and morbidity compared with surgery [64]. In patients with early-stage HCC (up to three lesions ≤ 3 cm), RFA has been adopted as an alternative first-line option irrespective of
liver function after demonstrating survival benefit similar to sur- gery in RCTs and meta-analyses [64, 67–70]. To date, MWA has not been adequately tested in comparison to RFA and the poten- tial advantage for tumours between 3 and 5 cm or the reduced impact of the cooling effect of adjacent large vessels remains un- known. Both methods have limitations in exophytic tumours as well as those close to the gallbladder, liver hilum or with neigh- bouring intestine, which may be overcome by administering lap- aroscopic surgery [71]. Chemical tumour ablation (e.g. by ethanol injection) plays no role, since thermal ablation has pro- ven better disease control and outcomes [72]. In very small lesions, superiority of thermal ablation is minimal [73].

High conformal, high dose rate radioablation (stereotactic body radiotherapy; high dose rate brachytherapy)
High conformal high dose rate (HDR) radioablation and stereo- tactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) may be considered as alterna- tives for the ablation of tumours with a high risk of local failure after thermal ablation due to location [III, C]. High conformal ir- radiation techniques with hypofractionated (SBRT) or single fraction dose regimens (HDR brachytherapy) have evolved as alternatives to thermal ablation in recent years. In contrast to classic fractionated irradiation schemes, high conformal HDR ir- radiation techniques such as SBRT or CT-guided HDR brachy-
therapy have proven efficacy with tumour control rates > 90% after 12 months in ≤ 5 cm (SBRT) or ≤ 12 cm tumour diameter
(HDR brachytherapy) in single-centre studies [74–77]. However, a recent comparative trial has demonstrated better survival when applying RFA than SBRT in small tumours ≤ 3 cm [78]. In con- trast to thermal ablation, high conformal HDR radioablation is
not limited by adjacency to large vessels, exophytic growth or central location. Both SBRT and HDR brachytherapy have dem- onstrated excellent safety profiles [79, 80]. External beam radio- therapy (EBRT) can be used to control pain in patients with bone metastases [III, B]. Any ablation recommendation should be pro- posed by the local multidisciplinary meeting (MDM) based on liver function, tumour size, tumour location and the medical ex- pertise provided by the given treatment centre.

Transarterial therapies
The almost exclusive arterial vascularisation of HCC resulted in the application of intra-arterial infusion of chemotherapy alone (doxorubicin, cisplatin, mytomicin C or combinations), mixed with the contrast agent lipiodol (ethiodised oil) that is selectively retained by HCC nodules, embolising material (e.g. coils, gelatin sponge pieces or polyvinyl alcohol-calibrated particles) or tiny radioactive particles containing yttrium-90 (90Y).
Absolute contraindications for transarterial therapies are de- compensated cirrhosis, extensive tumour burden, reduced portal vein flow, renal failure or any technical contraindication to
 
transarterial therapy. Important relative contraindications in- clude bile duct occlusion or incompetent papilla, reduced PS, impaired liver function (Child-Pugh B), high-risk oesophageal varices, portal vein thrombosis of any kind for TACE or involving the main trunk for selective internal radiotherapy (SIRT) [81].

Transarterial chemoembolisation
Overall, the efficacy of TACE has been explored in seven rando- mised trials compared with best supportive care (BSC) [82]. Only two studies reported a survival benefit for the treatment arm [83, 84]. The benefit of TACE in prolonging OS was demonstrated in selected asymptomatic patients with maintained liver function that belong to the BCLC A stage to early intermediate BCLC B stage, who had a small tumour burden but were not amenable to surgery or local ablation [I, A]. Median OS (mOS) of 30–
45 months can be expected in this population [85–87]. Shorter median survival of < 20 months has been reported in real life cohorts when patients with no proven benefit are treated includ-
ing those in Child-Pugh B stage, with portal vein invasion, large tumour burden or deteriorating liver function under TACE [88– 91]. Several scores have been developed to identify patients that benefit from TACE from retrospective cohort studies. Currently, only the hepatoma arterial-embolisation prognostic (HAP) score has been validated in a prospective trial and in multiple large international datasets [92, 93]. The HAP score is able to define four distinct prognostic groups with respect to OS and could be used as a stratification factor for TACE trials in future [88]. Outside clinical trials, the use of therapeutic algorithms based on prognostic scores of unknown predictive values is currently not recommended for the selection of candidates to initial and repeated TACE [III, A].
Conventional lipiodol-based TACE is the standard of practice, although using doxorubicin-eluting bead (DEB)-TACE is an op- tion to minimise systemic side effects of chemotherapy [I, C]. Compared with conventional TACE, in RCTs DEB-TACE is asso- ciated with significantly fewer side effects related to the leakage of doxorubicin into the systemic circulation [94] and provides a more standardised way to perform TACE. No prospective trial has so far demonstrated the superiority of conventional TACE, bland embolisation or DEB-TACE. One randomised phase II trial compared cisplatin-based conventional TACE with bland embol- isation using polyvinyl alcohol particles alone, and two trials have compared DEB-TACE with bland embolisation using unloaded beads [95–97]. None of these trials showed an apparent clinical benefit in terms of OS for the addition of chemotherapy; non- inferiority was also formally not proven.
The optimal duration and frequency of TACE treatment is not yet defined. TACE should not be repeated if a substantial necrosis is not achieved after the second session, or when a subsequent ses- sion fails to induce remission at sites that have initially responded to TACE. Additionally, the indication of TACE should be critical- ly re-evaluated in patients with reduced PS and impaired liver function following TACE treatment.
The combination of TACE with systemic agents such as sorafenib—either sequential or concomitant—is not recommended in clinical practice [I, E]. Five randomised trials with 2468 patients have not shown a clinical meaningful benefit of systemic therapy (sorafenib, brivanib or orantinib) in
 
combination with or following TACE compared with TACE alone in terms of median objective response rate (mORR), median progression-free survival (mPFS) or mOS [92, 98–101].

Selective internal radiotherapy
SIRT is based on the injection of microspheres loaded with the pure beta emitter 90Y into the hepatic arterial circulation and has no or minimal ischaemic effect. SIRT with 90Y glass or resin microbeads produces tumour responses and high disease control rates with a safe profile in phase II studies and registries [102].
SIRT is not recommended as first-line therapy for HCC patients in intermediate and advanced stage [I, E]. Two recent phase III trials randomised patients free from extrahepatic metas- tasis and with preserved liver function to sorafenib or SIRT using
resin microspheres. The SARAH trial in France (n ¼ 459 patients) and the SIRveNIB trial in Asia-Pacific (360 patients) failed to
meet the primary endpoint of improved OS compared with sora- fenib; survival for the sorafenib arm ranged from 10.2 to
9.9 months compared with 8.8 to 8 months for 90Y [hazard ratio (HR) 1.12–1.15] [103, 104]. The applicability of 90Y was limited to 72%–77% of patients due to treatment contraindications. Also, the per-protocol subgroup analyses did not yield any sur- vival advantages. The SORAMIC phase II trial additionally ana- lysed whether the addition of SIRT to sorafenib improves OS in patients with advanced HCC. However, this study failed to meet the primary endpoint, and the addition of SIRT to sorafenib did not show an OS that was superior to sorafenib alone. Whether subgroups such as non-cirrhotic patients or non-alcoholic aeti- ology of the cirrhosis with high positive HR for SIRT addition to sorafenib hold promise must be further validated [105].
In the phase III studies, SIRT was associated with higher re- sponse rates, delayed tumour progression in the liver and fewer adverse events (AEs) compared with sorafenib. The observed delay in tumour progression was also observed in retrospective cohort studies with survival rates comparable to those reported for TACE and sorafenib [106–108]. Thus, in exceptional circum- stances, for patients with liver-confined disease and preserved liver function in whom neither TACE nor systemic therapy is possible, SIRT may be considered. Additionally, SIRT may be considered instead of TACE for the treatment of small tumours in patients waiting for liver transplantation, in an attempt to avoid drop-out from the list due to tumour progression [106].


 
During the past 40 years, numerous RCTs testing treatments for advanced HCC have been published [109]. Sorafenib showed a survival benefit and it was established as the sole systemic treat- ment for patients with advanced HCC or those progressing from locoregional therapies. More recently, five additional drugs have shown positive clinical results in first- and second-line settings (see Figure 1).

Systemic therapies for advanced HCC
Chemotherapy. Chemotherapy has not been shown to improve survival in randomised trials and is not recommended as a stand- ard of care [II, C].
 
To date, four trials have been reported for which the experi- mental arms were: PIAF (cisplatin/interferon/doxorubicin/fluo- rouracil), the tubulin binding agent T138067, nolatrexed and FOLFOX (leucovorin/fluorouracil/oxaliplatin) [110–112]. None improved survival compared with doxorubicin, although re- sponse rates were higher with FOLFOX (8.2% versus 2.7%,
P ¼ 0.0233) and a small benefit in median survival was also seen on long-term follow up (6.4 versus 5.0 months, P ¼ 0.0425). One trial has compared sorafenib with the combination of sorafenib
and doxorubicin but did not demonstrate improved survival with combination therapy [113]. In summary, the clinical benefit of chemotherapy in the management of HCC has not been established.

Targeted first-line therapies. Sorafenib is the standard of care for patients with advanced HCC and those with intermediate-stage (BCLC B) disease not eligible for, or progressing despite, locore- gional therapies. It is recommended in patients with well- preserved liver function and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) PS 0–2 [I, A].
Lenvatinib showed non-inferiority efficacy compared with sor- afenib and can be considered in patients with advanced HCC without main portal vein invasion and with ECOG PS 0–1 as a front-line systemic treatment, pending European Medicines Agency (EMA) approval [I, A].

Sorafenib: Sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor blocking 40 kin- ases including vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) and BRAF, was established as the standard systemic therapy for HCC according to all international guidelines follow- ing the results reported a decade ago. It is indicated for patients with well-preserved liver function (Child-Pugh A class) and with advanced tumours (BCLC C) or those tumours at intermediate stage (BCLC B) progressing upon locoregional therapies. In the SHARP phase III trial, sorafenib improved survival compared
with placebo (HR 0.69; P ¼ 0.001; 7.9–10.7 months) [114]. The target population of this trial was mostly patients with advanced
HCC (80%, including 35% with macrovascular invasion and 50% with extrahepatic spread). The results of the SHARP trial were subsequently confirmed in the Asia-Pacific phase III trial
[115] and in 10 subsequent trials with an mOS in the range of 10– 12 months. Objective responses are uncommon; 2% by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (RECIST) and ~10% by modified RECIST (mRECIST) [116]. A recent meta-analysis of
individual data of two RCTs testing sorafenib has shown that, al- though of benefit to all patients across the board, it provides bet- ter outcomes in patients with HCV-related HCC and those with liver-only disease [117]. No predictive biomarkers of responsive- ness to sorafenib have been identified.
The recommended daily dose of sorafenib is 800 mg. Median treatment duration is estimated to be 5–6 months, but early pre- vention of toxicities can enhance tolerability. Treatment is associ- ated with manageable AEs, such as diarrhoea, hand–foot skin reactions, fatigue and hypertension. Around 15% of patients are intolerant to sorafenib, and thus treatment needs to be withdrawn, while another 35% of patients require dose reduction. Treatment- related liver failure or life-threatening complications are marginal. Considering the restrictive indication of sorafenib in terms of liver failure (mostly Child-Pugh A class), it has been estimated that only
 
half of patients at advanced stages can be suitable for this treat- ment. Clinically symptomatic vascular disease—either coronary or peripheral—is considered a formal contraindication.

Lenvatinib: Several phase III trials have been conducted to challenge sorafenib in front line (testing sunitinib, brivanib, erlo- tinib, linifanib or doxorubicin), but lenvatinib has only recently shown non-inferior clinical efficacy [118]. Lenvatinib is an oral multikinase inhibitor that targets VEGFR1–3 and fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)1–4, among others. Lenvatinib demonstrated non-inferiority results compared with sorafenib in an open-label, phase III, multicentre, non-inferiority trial involv- ing patients with advanced HCC (excluding main portal vein in-
vasion, clear bile duct invasion and > 50% of tumour to total liver volume occupancy). The dose was adjusted to body weight.
The study met its primary endpoint of non-inferiority in OS [HR 0.92; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.79–1.06; mOS lenva- tinib, 13.6 months versus sorafenib, 12.3 months]. Secondary endpoints such as PFS, time to progression and ORR (24% versus 9.2% for sorafenib, mRECIST ORR) were significantly better for lenvatinib. Lenvatinib-related most common any-grade AEs compared with sorafenib were as follows: hypertension (42% ver- sus 30%), diarrhoea (39% versus 45%) and hand–foot skin reac- tion (27% versus 52%). Median time on lenvatinib was
5.7 months. Time to worsening in quality of life was similar in both treatment arms (HR 1.01). These results position lenvatinib as an option in first-line treatment for advanced HCC, once the drug is approved by regulatory agencies. No cost-effectiveness studies comparing both drugs are available.

Targeted second-line therapies. Regorafenib is the standard of care for patients with advanced HCC who have tolerated sorafe- nib but progressed. It is recommended in patients with well- preserved liver function and ECOG PS 0–1 [I, A].
Cabozantinib can be considered for patients who had progres- sive disease on one or two systemic therapies with well-preserved liver function and ECOG PS 0–1, pending EMA approval [I, A].
Ramucirumab (RAM) can be considered for patients in second-line treatment with baseline AFP ≥ 400 ng/mL, well- preserved liver function and ECOG PS 0–1, pending EMA ap- proval [I, A].

Regorafenib: Recently, a phase III study comparing regorafenib (a multikinase inhibitor targeting similar kinases as sorafenib) with placebo in patients progressing despite sorafenib has reported a benefit in survival (HR 0.62; P < 0.0001, mOS 7.8–10.6 months) [119]. Treatment improved survival in all subgroups of patients.
In this trial, 88% of patients were BCLC C and 12% BCLC B, with all of them tolerant to but progressing on sorafenib. Around 30% of patients presented with macrovascular invasion: 70% with extrahepatic spread and 45% with AFP > 400 ng/dL. The response
rate was 10%, based upon mRECIST. Treatment was started at
160 mg/day (3 weeks on/1 week off). Median time on treatment was 3.5 months. AEs led to 51% dose reductions and 10% treat- ment discontinuation. Approval of regorafenib as a standard of care opens the field for third-line therapies. It should be kept in mind, however, that most patients at BCLC B-C stages not candi- dates to standard-of-care therapies (TACE, sorafenib, regorafenib) are generally unsuitable candidates to enter into clinical trials.
 
These patients along with those at BCLC D stage should receive best supportive/palliative care, including management of pain, nutrition and psychological support.

Cabozantinib: Cabozantinib is a MET, VEGFR2, AXL and RET inhibitor approved for thyroid and renal cancer. The CELESTIAL trial, a randomised, global phase III trial, examined cabozantinib versus placebo in patients with advanced HCC who had been pre- viously treated with sorafenib [120]. In contrast to regorafenib, this trial allowed the inclusion of patients that were intolerant to sorafenib and who had progressive disease on one or two systemic therapies. In this trial, 30% of patients presented with macrovascu- lar invasion, 78% with extrahepatic spread and 42% with AFP
> 400 ng/dL. Treatment was started at 60 mg/day, and median time on treatment was 3.8 months. OS results favoured cabozanti-
nib compared with placebo (HR 0.76, 95% CI 0.63–0.92;
P ¼ 0.0049; mOS 10.2 versus 8.0 months). Response rate was 4% with cabozantinib based upon RECIST v1.1. The most common grade 3/4 AEs with cabozantinib versus placebo were palmar–
plantar erythrodysesthaesia (17% versus 0%), hypertension (16% versus 2%), increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (12% versus 7%), fatigue (10% versus 4%) and diarrhoea (10% versus 2%) and led to 62% dose reductions and 16% treatment discontinuation.

Ramucirumab: RAM is a human immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) monoclonal antibody (mAb) that inhibits ligand activation of VEGFR2. In the phase III REACH trial mOS in the overall popula-
tion was not statistically significant, but a meaningful improvement was observed in a patient subgroup with baseline AFP ≥ 400 ng/ mL. Based on these data, the REACH-2 phase III trial analysed the
efficacy of RAM in patients with elevated baseline AFP following therapy with sorafenib. RAM treatment significantly improved mOS from 7.3 to 8.5 months (HR 0.710; 95% CI 0.531, 0.949;
P ¼ 0.0199) and mPFS from 1.6 to 2.8 months (HR 0.452; 95% CI
0.339, 0.603; P < 0.0001) compared with placebo [121]. ORR was 4.6% with RAM versus 1.1% with placebo (P ¼ 0.1156) and ORR was 59.9% RAM versus 38.9% with placebo (P ¼ 0.0006). The safety profile observed in the REACH-2 study was consistent with what has been previously observed, and the only grade ≥3 AEs occurring at a rate of ≥ 5% in the RAM arm were hypertension (12.2% versus 5.3%) and hyponatremia (5.6% versus 0%).

Immunotherapies
Immunotherapy with nivolumab and pembrolizumab can be considered in patients who are intolerant to, or have progressed under, approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors, pending EMA ap- proval [III, B]. For a definitive recommendation, it is necessary to wait for the results of randomised trials.
To date, the most promising immunotherapeutic approach has been the use of immune checkpoint inhibitors. Initial results from a small single-arm phase II trial of tremelimumab [a fully human- ised IgG2 anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) anti- body] demonstrated a response rate of 17% and time to progression of 6.5 months [122]. More recently, a large single-arm phase I/II trial of the fully human IgG4 programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) inhibitor nivolumab (CheckMate 040), has been reported [123]. A total of 262 patients were treated of which 48
 

 


 
were in dose escalation and 214 in dose expansion. The dose of 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks was shown to be tolerable during dose escal- ation and was used in dose expansion (in which patients were
required to be Child-Pugh A and ECOG PS ≤ 1). In dose expan- sion, there were no treatment-related deaths and grade 3/4 AST
and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) increase occurred in 4% and 2%, respectively. The most common AEs of any grade were fatigue (23%), pruritus (21%) and rash (15%). The ORR was 20% (RECIST v1.1) and the PFS and 9-month OS were 4.0 months and 74%, respectively. Expression of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD- L1) on tumour cell membranes was not found to be predictive. Overall, 145 patients in the expansion cohort had received prior sorafenib and, after extended follow-up, the mOS was 15.6 months (13.2–18.9). This compares favourably with all of the previously reported phase III second-line trials in HCC, for which mOS has been between 7.6 and 10.6 months in the experimental arm. On this basis, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted accelerated approval for the use of nivolumab in patients previously treated with sorafenib, on the condition that further tri- als were required to verify the clinical benefit of nivolumab in patients with HCC. The first-line phase III trial comparing sorafe- nib with nivolumab, CheckMate 459, is expected to report in 2018 and, if positive, will position nivolumab as a first-line treatment option.
Meanwhile, a phase II trial of the anti-PD-1 antibody pembro-
lizumab as second-line treatment (KEYNOTE-224) has recently been reported. The 16.3% response rate (RECIST v1.1) and 78% 6-month OS observed among the 104 patients included is in line with the results seen with nivolumab. Median time to progression was 4.9 months (95% CI: 3.9–8.0), mPFS was 4.9 months (95%
CI 3.4–7.2) and mOS was 12.9 months (95% CI 9.7–15.5) [124].


   Ongoing research in personalised therapy   
 
 
Molecular profiling is not recommended as standard of practice since it currently has no direct implication for decision making.
 
However, we recommend obtaining tissue in all research studies for exploring biomarkers of response.
There has been increasing interest in stratified trials driven by predictive biomarkers, and a number of earlier phase trials are exploring this strategy in HCC. Investigations into the molecular pathology of HCC have identified recurrent mutations of which the most common are in the TERT promotor, CTNNB1, TP53 and epigenetic regulators including ARID1A and ARID2 [125]. While these pathways provide a challenge for drug development, less common molecular aberrations are tractable and show promise. For example, overexpression of FGF19 is found in
≤ 20% of HCCs, and several compounds directed against its re-
ceptor FGFR4 are in development, including BLU-554 and
FGF401. Despite the disappointing results of the tivantinib phase III trial [126], there are ongoing studies enriching for MET pathway activation or MET overexpression with INC280 and MSC2156119J. Activation of the transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFb1) pathway is associated with a more aggressive sub- class of HCC and is being targeted with galunisertib in combina- tions with sorafenib and nivolumab, although these trials are not currently enriched for pathway activation. Numerous other tar- gets are being evaluated including androgen receptor, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) inhibitor, histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) and cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 (CDK 4/6), but, while personalised therapy holds promise for the future, there is insufficient evidence for molecu- lar stratification at the present time.


   Follow-up, long-term implications and   
 
 
Many HCC treatments act by induction of tumour necrosis or reduction in vascularity, which is not necessarily accompanied by tumour shrinkage. Viable tumour should be assessed using dynamic CT or MRI studies and should be defined as uptake of contrast agent in the arterial phase [III, A]. mRECIST are recom- mended for assessment of response/progression to locoregional
 
Table 6. Summary of recommendations

Incidence, epidemiology and surveillance
•	The association of chronic liver disease and HCC represents the basis for preventive strategies, including universal vaccination at birth against HBV [I, A] and early antiviral treatment of viral HBV and HCV [III, A]
•	Cost-effectiveness studies suggest surveillance of HCC is warranted in all cirrhotic patients irrespective of its aetiology, as long as liver function and comorbidities allow curative or palliative treatments [III, A]
•	Surveillance of non-cirrhotic, hepatitis-infected patients is also advocated, especially in HBV carriers with serum viral load > 10 000 copies/mL or
HCV-infected patients with bridging ﬁbrosis (F3) [III, A]
•	Surveillance of patients at risk for HCC should be carried out by abdominal US every 6 months with or without AFP [I, A]
Diagnosis and pathology/molecular biology
•	The diagnosis of HCC is based on histological analysis and/or contrast-enhanced imaging ﬁndings [III, A]
•	The diagnosis can be established if the typical vascular hallmarks of HCC (hypervascularity in the arterial phase with washout in the portal venous or delayed phase) are identiﬁed in a nodule of > 1 cm diameter using one of these two modalities in a cirrhotic patient [III, A]
•	Based on techniques such as diffusion-weighted imaging and the use of hepatobiliary contrast agents, MRI may allow identiﬁcation and stratiﬁcation of nodules as high-risk nodules (either HCC not displaying the typical imaging hallmarks features or high-grade dysplastic nodules) [IV, B]
•	For CEUS, an overlap between the vascular proﬁle of HCC and CC has been described. However, recent data suggest CEUS as a suitable technique to diagnose HCC non-invasively in the setting of liver cirrhosis [IV, B]
•	When tumour biopsy fails to demonstrate a correlate for a focal lesion, a second tumour biopsy, a different contrast enhanced imaging modality or (if amenable) direct resection of the lesion may be considered according to tumour size [IV, B]
•	Histopathological diagnosis of tumour biopsies relies on standard (H&E) and special stains (e.g. reticulin), and—if required—IHC
•	It is important to distinguish combined HCC/CC from HCC due to the different therapeutic modalities; however, the mixed differentiation features might not be visible in the biopsy. In addition, signiﬁcant expression of CK19 has been evaluated and is considered as a sign of poor prognosis in HCC [IV, B]
•	In highly differentiated HCC, deﬁnitive signs of malignancy (interstitial or vascular invasion) are frequently absent from biopsy. Further consented histological (trabecular alterations—more than two cell broad trabeculae, pseudoglands, reticulin loss, capsule formation) and cytological criteria (increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, i.e. ‘nuclear crowding’, increased cytoplasmic basophilia) support HCC diagnosis [III, B]
•	IHC should be carried out in unclear cases: capillarisation of sinusoids could be assessed using CD34 IHC [IV, B]
•	Further immunohistochemical markers have been shown to improve the diagnosis of highly differentiated HCC, including glutamine synthetase, glypican 3, CTC, EZH2 and HSP70 [IV, B]
•	A combination of the three markers glutamine synthetase, glypican 3 and HSP70 has been consented as a diagnostic panel (2/3 marker positivity has 70% sensitivity and 100% speciﬁcity for HCC) and the use of further markers seems to increase the sensitivity [IV, B]
Staging and risk assessment
•	Staging of HCC is important to determine outcome and planning of optimal therapy and includes assessment of tumour extent, AFP level, liver function, portal pressure and clinical PS [III, A]
•	BCLC is the commonly accepted staging system for prognostic prediction and treatment allocation
•	There is no demonstrated clinical beneﬁt of carrying out an FDG-PET scan as a staging modality, despite some evidence that there is a correlation of higher FDG uptake with poor differentiation, tumour size, serum AFP levels and microvascular invasion [IV, D]
•	Liver function is classically assessed by the Child-Pugh scoring system (serum bilirubin, serum albumin, ascites, prothrombin time and hepatic encephalopathy) [III, A]
•	Within the Child-Pugh A group, measurement of the ALBI score is able to split that group into best prognosis (ALBI 1) and lesser prognosis (ALBI 2), with median survivals of 26 versus 14 months, respectively [IV, B]
•	The ﬁnding of oesophageal varices and/or splenomegaly with blood platelet counts of 100 × 109 cells/L suggests clinically important portal hypertension, which can also be measured invasively by the transjugular route (hepatic-venous pressure gradient > 10 mmHg) [III, A]
Management of early and intermediate HCC
•	Child-Pugh A patients without immanent portal hypertension are considered good candidates for minor/major LRs [III, B]
•	Carefully selected patients with Child-Pugh B and/or portal hypertension may be candidates for minor surgical resection [III, A]
•	LR in cirrhosis should preferably be carried out as laparoscopic resection [IV, A]
•	The Milan criteria (one lesion < 5 cm; alternatively, up to three lesions, each < 3 cm; no extrahepatic manifestations; no evidence of macrovascular invasion) are currently the benchmark for the selection of patients with HCC for OLT. OLT is recommended for patients that ﬁt the Milan criteria, for
which < 10% recurrence and 70% 5-year survival are expected [II, A]
•	Among several more liberal proposals (up-to-seven, Toronto criteria, UCSF), only the UCSF criteria (one tumour ≤ 6.5 cm, three nodules at most with the largest ≤ 4.5 cm, and total tumour diameter ≤ 8 cm) were prospectively validated and showed similar outcome and, as such, may also be considered for OLT in patients with HCC beyond Milan criteria [III, B]
•	In the case of a long-anticipated waiting time (> 3 months), patients may be offered resection, local ablation or TACE in order to minimise the risk of tumour progression and to offer a ‘bridge’ to transplant [III, B]
•	Adjuvant therapy is not recommended for HCC patients after OLT, LR or local ablation [I, E]
•	Thermal ablation by means of RFA or MWA may be recommended as ﬁrst-line treatment in very early-stage disease (BCLC 0) [II, A]
 
•	High conformal HDR radioablation and SBRT may be considered as alternatives for the ablation of tumours with a high risk of local failure after thermal ablation due to location [III, C]
•	Outside clinical trials, the use of therapeutic algorithms based on prognostic scores of unknown predictive values is currently not recommended for the selection of candidates to initial and repeated TACE [III, A]
•	Conventional lipiodol-based TACE is the standard of care for patients with intermediate HCC, although using DEB-TACE is an option to minimise systemic side effects of chemotherapy [I, C]
•	The combination of TACE with systemic agents such as sorafenib—either sequential or concomitant—is not recommended in clinical practice [I, E]
•	SIRT is not recommended as ﬁrst-line therapy for patients in intermediate or advanced stage [I, E]
Management of advanced disease
•	Chemotherapy has not been shown to improve survival in randomised trials and is not recommended as a standard of care [II, C]
•	Sorafenib is the standard of care for patients with advanced HCC and those with intermediate-stage (BCLC B) disease not eligible for, or progressing des- pite, locoregional therapies. It is recommended in patients with well-preserved liver function and ECOG PS 0–2 [I, A]
•	Lenvatinib showed non-inferiority efﬁcacy compared with sorafenib, and can be considered as ﬁrst-line therapy in patients with advanced HCC without main portal vein invasion, clear bile duct invasion and ≥ 50% of tumour to total liver volume occupancy, pending EMA approval [I, A]
•	Regorafenib is the standard of care for patients with advanced HCC who have tolerated sorafenib but progressed. It is recommended in patients with well-preserved liver function and ECOG PS 0–1 [I, A]
•	Cabozantinib can be considered for patients who had progressive disease on one or two systemic therapies with well-preserved liver function and ECOG PS 0–1, pending EMA approval [I, A]
•	Ramucirumab can be considered for patients in second-line patients with baseline AFP ≥ 400 ng/mL, well-preserved liver function and ECOG PS 0–1,
pending EMA approval [I, A]
•	Immunotherapy with nivolumab and pembrolizumab can be considered in patients who are intolerant to, or have progressed under, approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors, pending EMA approval [III, B]. For a deﬁnitive recommendation, it is necessary to wait for the results of randomised trials
Follow-up, long-term implications and survivorship
•	Viable tumour should be assessed using dynamic CT or MRI studies and be deﬁned as uptake of contrast agent in the arterial phase [III, A]
•	mRECIST need further prospective validation but may be recommended in daily clinical practice to consider not only tumour diameters but also lesion via- bility in therapy decision making [III, B]
•	mRECIST are recommended for assessment of response/progression to locoregional therapies [III, B]
•	There is limited evidence that OS can be predicted more accurately by mRECIST than RECIST v1.1 [IV, B]
•	Follow-up of patients who underwent radical treatments (resection or RFA) should consist of the clinical evaluation of liver decompensation and the early detection of recurrence by dynamic CT or MRI studies every 3 months during the ﬁrst 2 years and surveillance every 6 months thereafter [III, A]
•	Patients with more advanced stages of HCC who are treated with TACE or systemic agents are evaluated clinically for signs of liver decompensation and for tumour progression by dynamic CT or MRI every 3 months to guide therapy decisions [III, A]


AFP, alpha foetoprotein; ALBI, albumin-bilirubin; BCLC, Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer; CC, cholangiocarcinoma; CEUS, contrast-enhanced ultrasound; CK19, cytokeratin 19; CT, computed tomography; DEB, doxorubicin-eluting bead; ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; EMA, European Medicines Agency; EZH2, enhancer of zeste homologue 2; FDG, ﬂuorodeoxyglucose; H&E, haemotoxylin and eosin; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HDR, high dose rate; HSP70, heat shock protein 70; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LR, liver resection; mRECIST, modiﬁed Response Criteria in Solid Tumours; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MWA, microwave ablation; OLT, orthotropic liver transplantation; OS, overall survival; PET, positron emis- sion tomography; PS; performance status; RECIST, Response Criteria in Solid Tumours; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; SIRT, selective internal radiotherapy; TACE, trans-arterial chemoembolisation; UCSF, University of California San Francisco; US, ultrasound.




 
therapies [III, B]. RECIST were primarily designed for the evalu- ation of cytotoxic agents. Modifications of RECIST (mRECIST) are available and are based on the measurement of the diameter of the viable tumour component of target lesions (Table 5) [116]. mRECIST also include guidelines regarding evaluation of vascular invasion, lymph nodes, effusions and new lesions. In 2011, the first study reported a link between mRECIST, EASL (European Association for the Study of Liver) criteria and OS in patients treated with TACE in contrast to RECIST v1.1, which was subsequently confirmed and validated [127–130]. In con- trast to locoregional therapies, the value of mRECIST in the evaluation of systemic therapy in HCC is not yet established. mRECIST were prospectively evaluated in the BRISK trial and responders had a better OS compared with non-responders
 
[131]; however, a higher objective response by mRECIST does not correlate with an improved OS in subsequent phase III trials [118]. In addition, the prospective comparison between mRECIST and RECIST in two trials with nintedanib and one trial with regorafenib revealed a very similar outcome, with no clear advantage of mRECIST [119, 132]. Overall, mRECIST need further prospective validation but may be used in daily clinical practice to consider not only tumour diameters but also lesion viability in therapy decision making [III, B]. There is lim- ited evidence that OS can be predicted more accurately by mRECIST than RECIST v1.1 [IV, B].
Response assessment following radioembolisation is challenging and should be carried out by multiple phase MRI or CT at ~3–4 months intervals. Imaging carried out early after
 


 
iv250 | Vogel et al.	Volume 29 | Supplement 4 | October 2018
 

 

 

radioembolisation may show arterial enhancement (both rim and intratumoural) related to post-treatment inflammatory changes and may be erroneously labelled as infiltrative tumour. These findings usually resolve after 6 months [133]. Prospective radiological–pathological studies have shown that EASL criteria and mRECIST—and not World Health Organization (WHO) criteria or RECIST—may capture responses at 3 months after radioembolisation [134].
In the context of immunotherapy, response evaluation may also be very challenging as pseudoprogression (transient increase in tu- mour size and AFP, followed by response) has been described also in HCC [135]. Recent trials with immunotherapies reported re- sponse rates of up to 25% by RECIST v1.1, and mRECIST have not been validated in this setting. Serum tumour markers (such as AFP levels) may be helpful particularly in the case of not easily measur- able disease but should not be used as the only determinant for treatment decisions [IV, B]. Pseudoprogression is incredibly rare but, in the future, immune RECIST (iRECIST) should be discussed in this context [136].
In summary, follow-up of patients who underwent radical treatments (resection or RFA) should consist of the clinical evalu- ation of liver decompensation and the early detection of recur- rence by dynamic CT or MRI studies every 3 months during the first year and surveillance every 6 months thereafter [III, A] [66, 137, 138]. Patients with recurrence following radical therapies may still be candidates for curative therapies. Patients with more advanced stages of HCC who are treated with TACE or systemic agents (e.g. sorafenib) are evaluated clinically for signs of liver de- compensation and for tumour progression by dynamic CT or MRI every 3 months to guide therapy decisions [III, A].


 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development http://www.esmo.org/
 

Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The relevant litera- ture has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of recommendations is shown in Table 6. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 7. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.


 
AV has received honoraria for talks and advisory boards from Bayer, Roche, Lilly, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, AstraZeneca, Eisai, Novartis and Ipsen; AC has provided consulting and advisory services for Merck Serono, Amgen, Servier, Roche, Lilly, Novartis, Takeda and Astellas and has received research support from Roche, Merck Serono, Servier, Beigene and Astellas; IC has reported being a member of the ad- visory boards of Eli-Lilly, Bristol-Myers Squibb, MSD, Bayer, Roche, Merck-Serono, Five Prime Therapeutics and Astra- Zeneca and has received research funding from Eli-Lilly, Janssen- Cilag, Sanofi Oncology, Merck-Serono and honorarium from Eli-Lilly; BD has received honoraria or consultation fees from Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, MSD, Merck KGaA, Ipsen, Eisai and Lilly; JL has received consultancy fees from Bayer, Bristol- Myers Squibb, Incyte, Lilly, Eisai, Celsion, Glycotest, Ipsen, Merck and Exelixis and research support from Incyte, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Eisai; TM has received consulting fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Bayer, Eisai, Ipsen, Merck, BTG and Beigene; UN has given presentations for Merck, Amgen, Roche, Gru¨nenthal and Bayer on topics other than HCC; JR has received consulting fees and research grants from Bayer Healthcare and Sirtex Medical; BS has received consulting and/or lecture fees from Adaptimmune, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, BTG, Onxeo, Sirtex and Terumo; PS has reported being a mem- ber of advisory board and has received grants from Novartis and
 
Bristol-Myers Squibb; CV has received consultancy fees and re- search funding from Bayer, Sirtex, Novartis and Ipsen; CJZ has received honoraria for lectures and advisory boards by Bayer Healthcare; DA has received honoraria for consultancy from Roche, Merck Serono, Bayer Healthcare, Servier, BTG, Terumo, Sanofi Oncology and Eli Lilly; EM has received honoraria for lec- ture and advisory boards for Roche, Amgen, Servier and Sanofi; JCN has reported no conflicts of interest.

 
1.	Petrick JL, Kelly SP, Altekruse SF et al. Future of hepatocellular carcin- oma incidence in the United States forecast through 2030. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 1787–1794.
2.	White DL, Thrift AP, Kanwal F et al. Incidence of hepatocellular carcin- oma in all 50 United States, from 2000 through 2012. Gastroenterology 2017; 152: 812–820.e5.
3.	Globoscan. http://globocan.iarc.fr/old/FactSheets/cancers/liver-new.asp
4.	Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Dikshit R et al. Cancer incidence and mortal- ity worldwide: sources, methods and major patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. Int J Cancer 2015; 136: e359–e386.
5.	Chang MH, Chen CJ, Lai MS et al. Universal hepatitis B vaccination in Taiwan and the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in children. Taiwan Childhood Hepatoma Study Group. N Engl J Med 1997; 336: 1855–1859.
6.	Papatheodoridis GV, Dalekos GN, Yurdaydin C et al. Incidence and predictors of hepatocellular carcinoma in Caucasian chronic hepatitis B patients receiving entecavir or tenofovir. J Hepatol 2015; 62: 363–370.
7.	Cardoso AC, Moucari R, Figueiredo-Mendes C et al. Impact of pegin- terferon and ribavirin therapy on hepatocellular carcinoma: incidence and survival in hepatitis C patients with advanced fibrosis. J Hepatol 2010; 52: 652–657.
8.	Waziry R, Hajarizadeh B, Grebely J et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma risk following direct-acting antiviral HCV therapy: a systematic review, meta-analyses, and meta-regression. J Hepatol 2017; 67: 1204–1212.
9.	Yatsuji S, Hashimoto E, Tobari M et al. Clinical features and outcomes of cirrhosis due to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis compared with cirrho- sis caused by chronic hepatitis C. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2009; 24: 248–254.
10.	Bugianesi E, Leone N, Vanni E et al. Expanding the natural history of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: from cryptogenic cirrhosis to hepatocellu- lar carcinoma. Gastroenterology 2002; 123: 134–140.
11.	Noureddin M, Rinella ME. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, diabetes, obesity, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Liver Dis 2015; 19: 361–379.
12.	Paradis V, Zalinski S, Chelbi E et al. Hepatocellular carcinomas in patients with metabolic syndrome often develop without significant liver fibrosis: a pathological analysis. Hepatology 2009; 49: 851–859.
13.	El-Serag HB, Richardson PA, Everhart JE. The role of diabetes in hepa- tocellular carcinoma: a case-control study among United States Veterans. Am J Gastroenterol 2001; 96: 2462–2467.
14.	Marrero JA, Fontana RJ, Fu S et al. Alcohol, tobacco and obesity are synergistic risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2005; 42: 218–224.
15.	Sarasin FP, Giostra E, Hadengue A. Cost-effectiveness of screening for detection of small hepatocellular carcinoma in western patients with Child-Pugh class A cirrhosis. Am J Med 1996; 101: 422–434.
16.	Chen CJ, Yang HI, Su J et al. Risk of hepatocellular carcinoma across a biological gradient of serum hepatitis B virus DNA level. JAMA 2006; 295: 65–73.
17.	Sato T, Tateishi R, Yoshida H et al. Ultrasound surveillance for early de- tection of hepatocellular carcinoma among patients with chronic hepa- titis C. Hepatol Int 2009; 3: 544–550.
18.	Singal A, Volk ML, Waljee A et al. Meta-analysis: surveillance with ultrasound for early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with cir- rhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2009; 30: 37–47.
 
19.	Zhang B, Yang B. Combined alpha fetoprotein testing and ultrasonog- raphy as a screening test for primary liver cancer. J Med Screen 1999; 6: 108–110.
20.	Zhang BH, Yang BH, Tang ZY. Randomized controlled trial of screening for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2004; 130: 417–422.
21.	Trinchet JC, Chaffaut C, Bourcier V et al. Ultrasonographic surveil- lance of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: a randomized trial comparing 3- and 6-month periodicities. Hepatology 2011; 54: 1987–1997.
22.	Matsui O, Kobayashi S, Sanada J et al. Hepatocelluar nodules in liver cirrhosis: hemodynamic evaluation (angiography-assisted CT) with special reference to multi-step hepatocarcinogenesis. Abdom Imaging 2011; 36: 264–272.
23.	Forner A, Vilana R, Ayuso C et al. Diagnosis of hepatic nodules 20 mm or smaller in cirrhosis: prospective validation of the noninvasive diagnostic criteria for hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 2008; 47: 97–104.
24.	Lee YJ, Lee JM, Lee JS et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma: diagnostic per- formance of multidetector CT and MR imaging-a systematic review and meta-analysis. Radiology 2015; 275: 97–109.
25.	Ye F, Liu J, Ouyang H. Gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)-enhanced magnetic resonance imag- ing and multidetector-row computed tomography for the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 2015; 94: e1157.
26.	Hanna RF, Miloushev VZ, Tang A et al. Comparative 13-year meta- analysis of the sensitivity and positive predictive value of ultrasound, CT, and MRI for detecting hepatocellular carcinoma. Abdom Radiol (NY) 2016; 41: 71–90.
27.	Tang A, Bashir MR, Corwin MT et al. Evidence supporting LI-RADS major features for CT- and MR imaging-based diagnosis of hepatocellu- lar carcinoma: a systematic review. Radiology 2018; 286: 29–48.
28.	Kumada T, Toyoda H, Tada T et al. Evolution of hypointense hepato- cellular nodules observed only in the hepatobiliary phase of gadoxetate disodium-enhanced MRI. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2011; 197: 58–63.
29.	Golfieri R, Grazioli L, Orlando E et al. Which is the best MRI marker of malignancy for atypical cirrhotic nodules: hypointensity in hepatobili- ary phase alone or combined with other features? Classification after Gd-EOB-DTPA administration. J Magn Reson Imaging 2012; 36: 648–657.
30.	Bartolozzi C, Battaglia V, Bargellini I et al. Contrast-enhanced magnetic res- onance imaging of 102 nodules in cirrhosis: correlation with histological findings on explanted livers. Abdom Imaging 2013; 38: 290–296.
31.	Yoon JH, Lee JM, Yang HK et al. Non-hypervascular hypointense nod- ules >/¼1 cm on the hepatobiliary phase of gadoxetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging in cirrhotic livers. Dig Dis  2014; 32:
678–689.
32.	Mitchell DG, Bruix J, Sherman M, Sirlin CB. LI-RADS (Liver Imaging Reporting and Data System): summary, discussion, and consensus of the LI-RADS Management Working Group and future directions. Hepatology 2015; 61: 1056–1065.
33.	CT/MRI   LI-RADSVR         v2018.   https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/
RADS/LI-RADS/LI-RADS-2018-Core.pdf? la¼en
34.	Khalili K, Kim TK, Jang HJ et al. Optimization of imaging diagnosis of
1-2 cm hepatocellular carcinoma: an analysis of diagnostic performance and resource utilization. J Hepatol 2011; 54: 723–728.
35.	Wildner D, Bernatik T, Greis C et al. CEUS in hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma in 320 patients - early or late washout matters: a subanalysis of the DEGUM multicenter trial. Ultraschall Med 2015; 36: 132–139.
36.	Terzi E, Iavarone M, Pompili M et al. Contrast ultrasound LI-RADS LR-5 identifies hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis in a multicenter restropective study of 1, 006 nodules. J Hepatol 2018; 68: 485–492.
37.	International Consensus Group for Hepatocellular Neoplasia. Pathologic diagnosis of early hepatocellular carcinoma: a report of the international consensus group for hepatocellular neoplasia. Hepatology 2009; 49: 658–664.
 
38.	Sciarra A, Di Tommaso L, Nakano M et al. Morphophenotypic changes in human multistep hepatocarcinogenesis with translational implica- tions. J Hepatol 2016; 64: 87–93.
39.	Calderaro J, Couchy G, Imbeaud S et al. Histological subtypes of hepa- tocellular carcinoma are related to gene mutations and molecular tu- mour classification. J Hepatol 2017; 67: 727–738.
40.	Yeh MM, Liu Y, Torbenson M. Steatohepatitic variant of hepatocellular carcinoma in the absence of metabolic syndrome or background stea- tosis: a clinical, pathological, and genetic study. Hum Pathol 2015; 46: 1769–1775.
41.	Silva MA, Hegab B, Hyde C et al. Needle track seeding following biopsy of liver lesions in the diagnosis of hepatocellular cancer: a systematic re- view and meta-analysis. Gut 2008; 57: 1592–1596.
42.	Fuks D, Cauchy F, Fusco G et al. Preoperative tumour biopsy does not affect the oncologic course of patients with transplantable HCC. J Hepatol 2014; 61: 589–593.
43.	Rockey DC, Caldwell SH, Goodman ZD et al. Liver biopsy. Hepatology 2009; 49: 1017–1044.
44.	Witjes CD, Verhoef C, Kwekkeboom DJ et al. Is bone scintigraphy indi- cated in surgical work-up for hepatocellular carcinoma patients? J Surg Res 2013; 181: 256–261.
45.	Boussouar S, Itti E, Lin SJ et al. Functional imaging of hepatocellular carcinoma using diffusion-weighted MRI and (18)F-FDG PET/CT in patients on waiting-list for liver transplantation. Cancer Imaging 2016; 16: 4.
46.	Hyun SH, Eo JS, Song BI et al. Preoperative prediction of microvascular invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma using 18F-FDG PET/CT: a multi- center retrospective cohort study. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2018; 45: 720–726.
47.	Johnson PJ, Berhane S, Kagebayashi C et al. Assessment of liver function in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma: a new evidence-based ap- proach-the ALBI grade. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 550–558.
48.	Augustin S, Pons M, Maurice JB et al. Expanding the Baveno VI criteria for the screening of varices in patients with compensated advanced chronic liver disease. Hepatology 2017; 66: 1980–1988.
49.	Brierley JD, Gospodarowicz MK, Wittekind C (eds). IUCC TNM Classification of Malignant Tumours, 8th edition. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 2016.
50.	Kamarajah SK, Frankel TL, Sonnenday C et al. Critical evaluation of the American Joint Commission on Cancer (AJCC) 8th edition staging sys- tem for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC): a Surveillance, Epidemiology, End Results (SEER) analysis. J Surg Oncol 2018; 117: 644–650.
51.	Forner A, Reig M, Bruix J. Hepatocellular carcinoma. Lancet 2018; 391: 1301–1314.
52.	Cucchetti A, Ercolani G, Vivarelli M et al. Is portal hypertension a contraindication to hepatic resection? Ann Surg 2009; 250: 922–928.
53.	Berzigotti A, Reig M, Abraldes JG et al. Portal hypertension and the out- come of surgery for hepatocellular carcinoma in compensated cirrhosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hepatology 2015; 61: 526–536.
54.	Fancellu A, Rosman AS, Sanna V et al. Meta-analysis of trials comparing minimally-invasive and open liver resections for hepatocellular carcin- oma. J Surg Res 2011; 171: e33–e45.
55.	Yuki K, Hirohashi S, Sakamoto M et al. Growth and spread of hepato- cellular carcinoma. A review of 240 consecutive autopsy cases. Cancer 1990; 66: 2174–2179.
56.	Clavien PA, Petrowsky H, DeOliveira ML, Graf R. Strategies for safer liver surgery and partial liver transplantation. N Engl J Med 2007; 356: 1545–1559.
57.	Cucchetti A, Cescon M, Ercolani G et al. A comprehensive meta- regression analysis on outcome of anatomic resection versus nonana- tomic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol 2012; 19: 3697–3705.
58.	Zhou Y, Xu D, Wu L, Li B. Meta-analysis of anatomic resection versus nonanatomic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma. Langenbecks Arch Surg 2011; 396: 1109–1117.
 
59.	Rahbari NN, Mehrabi A, Mollberg NM et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma: current management and perspectives for the future. Ann Surg 2011; 253: 453–469.
60.	Clavien PA, Lesurtel M, Bossuyt PM et al. Recommendations for liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: an international consen- sus conference report. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: e11–e22.
61.	Yao FY, Xiao L, Bass NM et al. Liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: validation of the UCSF-expanded criteria based on pre- operative imaging. Am J Transplant 2007; 7: 2587–2596.
62.	Mazzaferro V, Llovet JM, Miceli R et al. Predicting survival after liver transplantation in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma beyond the Milan criteria: a retrospective, exploratory analysis. Lancet Oncol 2009; 10: 35–43.
63.	Yao FY. Liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: beyond the Milan criteria. Am J Transplant 2008; 8: 1982–1989.
64.	Cucchetti A, Piscaglia F, Cescon M et al. Cost-effectiveness of hepatic resection versus percutaneous radiofrequency ablation for early hepato- cellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2013; 59: 300–307.
65.	Geissler EK, Schnitzbauer AA, Zulke C et al. Sirolimus use in liver trans- plant recipients with hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomized, multi- center, open-label phase 3 trial. Transplantation 2016; 100: 116–125.
66.	Bruix J, Takayama T, Mazzaferro V et al. Adjuvant sorafenib for hepato- cellular carcinoma after resection or ablation (STORM): a phase 3, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 1344–1354.
67.	Hasegawa K, Kokudo N, Makuuchi M et al. Comparison of resection and ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma: a cohort study based on a Japanese nationwide survey. J Hepatol 2013; 58: 724–729.
68.	Chen MS, Li JQ, Zheng Y et al. A prospective randomized trial compar- ing percutaneous local ablative therapy and partial hepatectomy for small hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg 2006; 243: 321–328.
69.	Huang J, Yan L, Cheng Z et al. A randomized trial comparing radiofre- quency ablation and surgical resection for HCC conforming to the Milan criteria. Ann Surg 2010; 252: 903–912.
70.	Feng K, Yan J, Li X et al. A randomized controlled trial of radiofre- quency ablation and surgical resection in the treatment of small hepato- cellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2012; 57: 794–802.
71.	Jiang B, Yan XF, Zhang JH. Meta-analysis of laparoscopic versus open liver resection for hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatol Res 2018; 48: 635–663.
72.	Lin ZZ, Shau WY, Hsu C et al. Radiofrequency ablation is superior to ethanol injection in early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma irrespective of tumor size. PLoS One 2013; 8: e80276.
73.	Germani G, Pleguezuelo M, Gurusamy K et al. Clinical outcomes of radiofrequency ablation, percutaneous alcohol and acetic acid injection for hepatocelullar carcinoma: a meta-analysis. J Hepatol 2010; 52: 380–388.
74.	Zeng ZC, Seong J, Yoon SM et al. Consensus on stereotactic body radi- ation therapy for small-sized hepatocellular carcinoma at the 7th Asia- Pacific Primary Liver Cancer Expert Meeting. Liver Cancer 2017; 6: 264–274.
75.	Denecke T, Stelter L, Schnapauff D et al. CT-guided interstitial brachy- therapy of hepatocellular carcinoma before liver transplantation: an equivalent alternative to transarterial chemoembolization? Eur Radiol 2015; 25: 2608–2616.
76.	Mohnike K, Wieners G, Schwartz F et al. Computed tomography- guided high-dose-rate brachytherapy in hepatocellular carcinoma: safety, efficacy, and effect on survival. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2010; 78: 172–179.
77.	Collettini F, Schreiber N, Schnapauff D et al. CT-guided high-dose-rate brachytherapy of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Strahlenther Onkol 2015; 191: 405–412.
78.	Rajyaguru DJ, Borgert AJ, Smith AL et al. Radiofrequency ablation ver- sus stereotactic body radiotherapy for localized hepatocellular carcin- oma in nonsurgically managed patients: analysis of the national cancer database. J Clin Oncol 2018; 36: 600–608.
 
79.	Brinkhaus G, Lock JF, Malinowski M et al. CT-guided high-dose-rate brachytherapy of liver tumours does not impair hepatic function and shows high overall safety and favourable survival rates. Ann Surg Oncol 2014; 21: 4284–4292.
80.	Rim CH, Kim CY, Yang DS, Yoon WS. Comparison of radiation ther- apy modalities for hepatocellular carcinoma with portal vein throm- bosis: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Radiother Oncol 2018 [Epub ahead of print].
81.	Sangro B, Salem R. Transarterial chemoembolization and radioemboli- zation. Semin Liver Dis 2014; 34: 435–443.
82.	Llovet JM, Bruix J. Systematic review of randomized trials for unresect- able hepatocellular carcinoma: chemoembolization improves survival. Hepatology 2003; 37: 429–442.
83.	Llovet   JM,   Real   MI,   Montan~a   X   et   al.   Arterial   embolisation   or chemoembolisation versus symptomatic treatment in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2002; 359: 1734–1739.
84.	Lo CM, Ngan H, Tso WK et al. Randomized controlled trial of transar- terial lipiodol chemoembolization for unresectable hepatocellular car- cinoma. Hepatology 2002; 35: 1164–1171.
85.	Golfieri R, Giampalma E, Renzulli M et al. Randomised controlled trial of doxorubicin-eluting beads vs conventional chemoembolisation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Br J Cancer 2014; 111: 255–264.
86.	Burrel M, Reig M, Forner A et al. Survival of patients with hepatocellu- lar carcinoma treated by transarterial chemoembolisation (TACE) using drug eluting beads. Implications for clinical practice and trial design. J Hepatol 2012; 56: 1330–1335.
87.	Malagari K, Pomoni M, Moschouris H et al. Chemoembolization with doxorubicin-eluting beads for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: five- year survival analysis. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2012; 35: 1119–1128.
88.	Kadalayil L, Benini R, Pallan L et al. A simple prognostic scoring system for patients receiving transarterial embolisation for hepatocellular can- cer. Ann Oncol 2013; 24: 2565–2570.
89.	Sieghart W, Hucke F, Pinter M et al. The ART of decision making: retreatment with transarterial chemoembolization in patients with hep- atocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 2013; 57: 2261–2273.
90.	Hucke F, Sieghart W, Pinter M et al. The ART-strategy: sequential as- sessment of the ART score predicts outcome of patients with hepatocel- lular carcinoma re-treated with TACE. J Hepatol 2014; 60: 118–126.
91.	Kirstein MM, Schweitzer N, Ay N et al. Experience from a real-life cohort: outcome of 606 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma following transarte- rial chemoembolization. Scand J Gastroenterol 2017; 52: 116–124.
92.	Meyer T, Fox R, Ma YT et al. Sorafenib in combination with transarte- rial chemoembolisation in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (TACE 2): a randomised placebo-controlled, double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017; 2: 565–575.
93.	Waked I, Berhane S, Toyoda H et al. Transarterial chemo-embolisation of hepatocellular carcinoma: impact of liver function and vascular inva- sion. Br J Cancer 2017; 116: 448–454.
94.	Lammer J, Malagari K, Vogl T et al. Prospective randomized study of doxorubicin-eluting-bead embolization in the treatment of hepatocel- lular carcinoma: results of the PRECISION V study. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2010; 33: 41–52.
95.	Meyer T, Kirkwood A, Roughton M et al. A randomised phase II/III trial of 3-weekly cisplatin-based sequential transarterial chemoemboli- sation vs embolisation alone for hepatocellular carcinoma. Br J Cancer 2013; 108: 1252–1259.
96.	Brown KT, Do RK, Gonen M et al. Randomized trial of hepatic artery embolization for hepatocellular carcinoma using doxorubicin-eluting microspheres compared with embolization with microspheres alone. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 2046.
97.	Malagari K, Pomoni M, Kelekis A et al. Prospective randomized com- parison of chemoembolization with doxorubicin-eluting beads and bland embolization with BeadBlock for hepatocellular carcinoma. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2010; 33: 541–551.
98.	Kudo M, Cheng AL, Park JW et al. Orantinib versus placebo combined with transcatheter arterial chemoembolisation in patients with
 
unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (ORIENTAL): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre, phase 3 study. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018; 3: 37–46.
99.	Kudo M, Han G, Finn RS et al. Brivanib as adjuvant therapy to transar- terial chemoembolization in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomized phase III trial. Hepatology 2014; 60: 1697–1707.
100.	Kudo M, Imanaka K, Chida N et al. Phase III study of sorafenib after trans- arterial chemoembolisation in Japanese and Korean patients with unresect- able hepatocellular carcinoma. Eur J Cancer 2011; 47: 2117–2127.
101.	Lencioni R, Llovet JM, Han G et al. Sorafenib or placebo plus TACE with doxorubicin-eluting beads for intermediate stage HCC: the SPACE trial. J Hepatol 2016; 64: 1090–1098.
102.	Salem R, Mazzaferro V, Sangro B. Yttrium 90 radioembolization for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma: biological lessons, current chal- lenges, and clinical perspectives. Hepatology 2013; 58: 2188–2197.
103.	Chow PKH, Gandhi M, Tan SB et al. SIRveNIB: selective internal radi- ation therapy versus sorafenib in Asia-Pacific patients with hepatocellu- lar carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2018; 36: 1913–1921.
104.	Vilgrain V, Pereira H, Assenat E et al. Efficacy and safety of selective in- ternal radiotherapy with yttrium-90 resin microspheres compared with sorafenib in locally advanced and inoperable hepatocellular carcinoma (SARAH): an open-label randomised controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18: 1624–1636.
105.	Ricke J, Sangro B, Amthauer H et al. The impact of combining Selective Internal Radiation Therapy (SIRT) with sorafenib on overall survival in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: the Soramic trial pal- liative cohort. J Hepatol 2018; 68(Suppl 1): S102.
106.	Salem R, Gordon AC, Mouli S et al. Y90 radioembolization significantly prolongs time to progression compared with chemoembolization in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 2016; 151: 115–1163.e2.
107.	Salem R, Lewandowski RJ, Kulik L et al. Radioembolization results in longer time-to-progression and reduced toxicity compared with chemoembolization in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 2011; 140: 497–507.e2.
108.	Riaz A, Gabr A, Abouchaleh N et al. Radioembolization for hepatocellu- lar carcinoma: statistical confirmation of improved survival in respond- ers by landmark analyses. Hepatology 2018; 67: 873–883.
109.	Llovet JM, Villanueva A, Lachenmayer A, Finn RS. Advances in targeted therapies for hepatocellular carcinoma in the genomic era. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2015; 12: 436.
110.	Yeo W, Mok TS, Zee B et al. A randomized phase III study of doxorubi- cin versus cisplatin/interferon alpha-2b/doxorubicin/fluorouracil (PIAF) combination chemotherapy for unresectable hepatocellular car- cinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005; 97: 1532–1538.
111.	Gish RG, Porta C, Lazar L et al. Phase III randomized controlled trial comparing the survival of patients with unresectable hepatocellular car- cinoma treated with nolatrexed or doxorubicin. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 3069–3075.
112.	Qin S, Bai Y, Lim HY et al. Randomized, multicenter, open-label study of oxaliplatin plus fluorouracil/leucovorin versus doxorubicin as pallia- tive chemotherapy in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma from Asia. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 3501–3508.
113.	Abou-Alfa GK, Johnson P, Knox JJ et al. Doxorubicin plus sorafenib vs doxorubicin alone in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomized trial. JAMA 2010; 304: 2154–2160.
114.	Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V et al. Sorafenib in advanced hepatocel- lular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2008; 359: 378–390.
115.	Cheng AL, Kang YK, Chen Z et al. Efficacy and safety of sorafenib in patients in the Asia-Pacific region with advanced hepatocellular carcin- oma: a phase III randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 2009; 10: 25–34.
116.	Lencioni R, Llovet JM. Modified RECIST (mRECIST) assessment for hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin Liver Dis 2010; 30: 52–60.
117.	Bruix J, Cheng AL, Meinhardt G et al. Prognostic factors and predictors of sorafenib benefit in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma: analysis of two phase III studies. J Hepatol 2017; 67: 999–1008.
 
118.	Kudo M, Finn RS, Qin S et al. Lenvatinib versus sorafenib in first-line treatment of patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomised phase 3 non-inferiority trial. Lancet 2018; 391: 1163–1173.
119.	Bruix J, Qin S, Merle P et al. Regorafenib for patients with hepatocellu- lar carcinoma who progressed on sorafenib treatment (RESORCE): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2017; 389: 56–66.
120.	Abou-Alfa GK, Meyer T, Cheng AL et al. Cabozantinib (C) versus pla- cebo (P) in patients (pts) with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) who have received prior sorafenib: results from the randomized phase III CELESTIAL trial. J Clin Oncol 2018; 36(Suppl 4): 207.
121.	Zhu AX, Kang Y-K, Yen C-J et al. REACH-2: a randomized, double- blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 study of ramucirumab versus placebo as second-line treatment in patients with advanced hepatocellular car- cinoma (HCC) and elevated baseline alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) following first-line sorafenib. J Clin Oncol 2018; 36: 4003–4003.
122.	Sangro B, Gomez-Martin C, de la Mata M et al. A clinical trial of CTLA- 4 blockade with tremelimumab in patients with hepatocellular carcin- oma and chronic hepatitis C. J Hepatol 2013; 59: 81–88.
123.	El-Khoueiry AB, Sangro B, Yau T et al. Nivolumab in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (CheckMate 040): an open-label, non-comparative, phase 1/2 dose escalation and expansion trial. Lancet 2017; 389: 2492–2502.
124.	Zhu AX, Finn RS, Edeline J et al. Pembrolizumab in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma previously treated with sorafenib (KEYNOTE- 224): a non-randomised, open-label phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2018; 19: 940–952.
125.	Zucman-Rossi J, Villanueva A, Nault JC, Llovet JM. Genetic landscape and biomarkers of hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 2015; 149: 1226–1239.e4.
126.	Rimassa L, Assenat E, Peck-Radosavljevic M et al. Tivantinib for second-line treatment of MET-high, advanced hepatocellular carcin- oma (METIV-HCC): a final analysis of a phase 3, randomised, placebo- controlled study. Lancet Oncol 2018; 19: 682–693.
127.	Gillmore R, Stuart S, Kirkwood A et al. EASL and mRECIST responses are independent prognostic factors for survival in hepatocellular cancer patients treated with transarterial embolization. J Hepatol 2011; 55: 1309–1316.
128.	Shim JH, Lee HC, Kim SO et al. Which response criteria best help pre- dict survival of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma following
 
chemoembolization? A validation study of old and new models. Radiology 2012; 262: 708–718.
129.	Vincenzi B, Di Maio M, Silletta M et al. Prognostic relevance of objective response according to EASL criteria and mRECIST criteria in hepatocellular carcinoma patients treated with loco-regional therapies: a literature-based meta-analysis. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0133488.
130.	Prajapati HJ, Spivey JR, Hanish SI et al. mRECIST and EASL responses
at early time point by contrast-enhanced dynamic MRI predict survival in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) treated by doxorubicin drug-eluting beads transarterial chemoembolization (DEB TACE). Ann Oncol 2013; 24: 965–973.
131.	Lencioni R, Montal R, Torres F et al. Objective response by mRECIST as a predictor and potential surrogate end-point of overall survival in advanced HCC. J Hepatol 2017; 66: 1166–1172.
132.	Meyer T, Palmer DH, Cheng AL et al. mRECIST to predict survival in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: analysis of two randomised phase II trials comparing nintedanib vs sorafenib. Liver Int 2017; 37: 1047–1055.
133.	Semaan S, Makkar J, Lewis S et al. Imaging of hepatocellular carcinoma
response after 90Y radioembolization. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2017; 209: w263–w276.
134.	Vouche M, Kulik L, Atassi R et al. Radiological–pathological analysis of
WHO, RECIST, EASL, mRECIST and DWI: imaging analysis from a prospective randomized trial of Y90 6 sorafenib. Hepatology 2013; 58: 1655–1666.
135.	Mamdani H, Wu H, O’Neil BH, Sehdev A. Excellent response to Anti- PD-1 therapy in a patient with hepatocellular carcinoma: case report and review of literature. Discov Med 2017; 23: 331–336.
136.	Seymour L, Bogaerts J, Perrone A et al. iRECIST: guidelines for response
criteria for use in trials testing immunotherapeutics. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18: e143–e152.
137.	Crocetti L, de Baere T, Lencioni R. Quality improvement guidelines for
radiofrequency ablation of liver tumours. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2010; 33: 11–17.
138.	Sasaki Y, Yamada T, Tanaka H et al. Risk of recurrence in a long-term follow-up after surgery in 417 patients with hepatitis B- or hepatitis C-related hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg 2006; 244: 771–780.
139.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic
infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
