
 
SPECIAL ARTICLE
 
Annals of Oncology 30: 1558–1571, 2019 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdz233
Published online 5 August 2019
 

 

 

N. Stjepanovic1, L. Moreira2, F. Carneiro3,4,5,6, F. Balaguer2, A. Cervantes7, J. Balman~a1 & E. Martinelli8, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Medical Oncology Department, University Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona; 2Gastroenterology Department, Hospital Cl´ınic de Barcelona, Institut d’Investigacions Biome`diques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Centro de Investigacio´n Biome´dica en Red de Enfermedades Hepa´ticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Barcelona, Spain; 3Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto; 4Instituto de Investigac¸~ao e Inovac¸~ao em Sau´de (i3S), Porto; 5Medical Faculty
of the University of Porto, Porto; 6Centro Hospitalar Universita´rio S~ao Jo~ao, Porto, Portugal; 7CIBERONC, Department of Medical Oncology, Biomedical Research
Institute INCLIVA, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain; 8Dipartimento di Medicina di Precisione, Universita` degli Studi della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Napoli, Italy

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: May 2019.



 
Knowledge of genetic susceptibility to gastrointestinal cancers is constantly evolving with identification of new genes. Similarly, a better understanding of the genotype/phenotype relationship in patients with Lynch syndrome (LS) or familial adenomatous polyp- osis (FAP) is leading to more individualised surveillance recom- mendations. In addition, molecular profiling of patients with cancer has been shown to guide targeted therapies, such as im- munotherapy. Specialists involved in the care of patients with gastrointestinal cancer should be familiar with the main hereditary cancer syndromes and refer patients to specialised cancer genetic units for adequate genetic counselling and to address specific concerns associated to each genetic susceptibility. These guidelines aim to summarise the evidence-based data on hereditary colorectal cancer (CRC), gastric cancer (GC) and pancreatic cancer (PC) and provide useful clinical recommendations for identification and management of patients with hereditary gastrointestinal cancers.


  Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer  

 
Prevalence and penetrance

LS accounts for 1%–3% of all CRC diagnoses [1]. It is caused by germline mutations in one of the mismatch repair (MMR) genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 or PMS2) or epithelial cell adhesion mol- ecule (EPCAM, which causes epigenetic silencing of MSH2) and has an autosomal dominant inheritance. More than 70% of
 
mutations are identified in MLH1, MSH2 or EPCAM in tumours with microsatellite instability (MSI)-high.
LS is characterised by an increased lifetime risk of CRC (30%–73%) and extracolonic malignancies such as endometrial (30%–51%), ovarian (4%–15%), gastric (up to 18%), small
bowel (3%–5%), urinary tract (2%–20%), pancreatic (4%), brain or cutaneous gland tumours [2–4]. The carriers of pathogenic variants in MLH1 and MSH2 genes have a substantially higher risk of CRC cancer with younger age at diagnosis compared with carriers of MSH6 or PMS2 pathogenic variants. The cumulative incidence of endometrial and urinary tract cancers is higher in MSH2 carriers [5]. Data on cancer risk estimates for carriers of an EPCAM deletion is still limited.
Historically, two LS clinical phenotypes have been described in those individuals with germline MMR gene pathogenic variants presenting with the combination of central nervous system tumours (Turcot syndrome) or combination of cutaneous gland tumours (Muir–Torre syndrome) [6, 7]. Recently, a third pheno- type denominated constitutional or biallelic MMR deficiency (CMMRD) has been described in those individuals who are homozygous or compound heterozygotes for pathogenic variants in the MMR gene and is characterised by cafe´-au-lait spots and childhood-onset tumours [8, 9].


Clinical and molecular diagnosis
Alterations in the MMR genes lead to accumulation of errors dur- ing DNA replication, especially in repetitive sequences known as
 

VC   The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
microsatellites, causing MSI in the LS-related tumours. Due to the alterations in the MMR genes, the LS tumours may lack the expression of the corresponding MMR protein [tested by immu- nohistochemistry (IHC) staining]. MMR IHC testing on CRC tumours has a sensitivity and specificity of 94% and 88%, respect- ively, and is highly correlated to MSI status [10].
Approximately 10% of CRCs display loss of expression of MLH1 and MSI due to somatic hypermethylation of the MLH1 promoter, often associated with BRAF V600E mutation in sporadic CRC. Therefore, if loss of MLH1 expression (alone or concurrently with loss of PMS2 expression) is observed, methylation analysis of the MLH1 promoter in the tumour and/or analysis for somatic BRAF V600E mutation should be carried out first [III, B]. Similarly, if loss of MLH1 expression (alone or concurrently with loss of PMS2 ex- pression) is observed in GCs, hypermethylation of the MLH1 pro- moter should be ruled out first [III, B]. Double somatic mutations in CRC and endometrial cancer (EC) have recently been recognised by tumour sequencing. Tumours with double somatic mutations in MMR genes have a molecular phenotype that mimic LS cancers, as they present with MSI and lack the expression of MMR proteins [11]. Therefore, somatic MMR gene testing for patients with unex- plained abnormal tumour screening is suggested [III, B] [11].
Clinical criteria used for identification of individuals at risk of LS, such as Amsterdam II criteria and revised Bethesda guidelines are based on age and family history of cancer (Table 1) [12, 13]. Due to the limited sensitivity and specificity of the clinical crite- ria, a broader CRC molecular screening with MMR IHC and/or MSI via polymerase chain reaction was proposed (Figure 1). The universal MMR IHC tumour testing in CRC patients has been shown to be more sensitive than the Bethesda guidelines for the identification of individuals at risk of LS (100% versus 87.8%) [14]. In addition, clinical criteria are gradually being surpassed by the evolving universal MMR IHC due to the role of MSI as a bio- marker for predicting good response to treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors in advanced cancer patients [15, 16]. Germline genetic testing can be considered in patients who fulfil the Amsterdam criteria, regardless of the MMR status. If multi- gene panel testing is available, MUTYH, POLE and POLD1 genes can be added to MMR genes, especially in those diagnosed at
<50 years [III, C] [17, 18].
Similarly, MMR IHC and/or MSI screening followed by ana-
lysis of MLH1 promoter hypermethylation (if loss of expression of MLH1) is also recommended for women with EC, since 2%–3% of ECs are associated with LS [III, B] [19].
For those individuals where no tumour tissue is available for molecular testing, prediction models that estimate the likelihood of finding an MMR gene pathogenic variant (i.e. PREMM model) constitute an effective clinical tool to consider referral for genetic testing [III, B] [20].
Pathogenic genetic alterations might be frameshift, nonsense or splice site mutations that lead to truncating or unstable pro- teins, but large deletions and rearrangements are also common. Therefore, full germline genetic testing should include both DNA sequencing and large rearrangement analysis [III, A].

Surveillance and risk reduction
For individuals with LS, prevention and early detection of associ- ated cancers by active surveillance can increase survival and
 
improve quality of life. Thanks to advances in the genotype/ phenotype correlation for LS patients, the surveillance protocol may be tailored according to the genetic alteration and family his- tory of cancer (Table 2).

Colorectal surveillance. Accelerated adenoma-carcinoma se- quence has been demonstrated in individuals with LS. Periodic colonoscopy surveillance allows the resection of polyps and iden- tification of early-stage CRC. Colonoscopies carried out every 3 years have shown a CRC incidence and mortality reduction of 62% and 66%, respectively, while more frequent screening has been associated with earlier stage of CRC at diagnosis and up to 72% decrease in CRC mortality [21–23]. Since the diagnosis of CRC before age 25 is unlikely in individuals with LS, and the CRC risk in MSH6 and PMS2 mutation carriers is substantially lower than for MLH1 and MSH2 ones, onset of colonoscopy surveil- lance is recommended at the age of 25 years for MLH1 and MSH2 mutation carriers and at the age of 35 years for MSH6 and PMS2 mutation carriers [III, C] [24, 25]. In all cases, age of onset in the youngest member of the family is to be considered and surveil- lance should be started 5 years earlier [V, B]. Surveillance colon- oscopy every 1–2 years in asymptomatic individuals with LS is recommended [III, A] [5].
Chromoendoscopy with indigo carmine added to the standard colonoscopy has been shown to be substantially more effective than colonoscopy alone in LS individuals [26]. High-quality colonoscopy carried out in dedicated centres is advised [IV, C].

Gastric and small bowel surveillance. There is no clear evidence to support upper gastrointestinal endoscopy surveillance in all LS patients. Consider testing and treating Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) in all mutation carriers [27]. In regions with high GC inci- dence and in families with a history of gastric neoplasms, surveil- lance with upper endoscopy may be considered every 1–3 years, starting at the age of 30–35 years [27]. Routine surveillance of the small bowel in LS has a high rate of false-positive findings and it is not considered to be cost-efficient [IV, C].

Pancreatic surveillance. Annual magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and/or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) surveillance in indi- viduals with LS and one first-degree relative (FDR) affected with PC may be considered, although more supporting evidence is needed [IV, C] [28].

Gynaecological surveillance. Transvaginal ultrasound (TV US) has shown poor sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of EC in women with LS, while endometrial sampling could identify patients with premalignant endometrial lesions or asymptomatic endometrial carcinomas. Prophylactic hysterectomy and/or bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy reduce the incidence of EC and ovarian cancer in the LS population, although the survival benefit has not been demonstrated [29].
We recommend an annual gynaecological examination, TV US with cancer antigen 125 (CA 125) analysis and endometrial bi- opsy from age 30 to 35 years [IV, C]. Prophylactic hysterectomy with bilateral oophorectomy is an option that might be discussed and considered for mutation carriers who have completed child- bearing or are postmenopausal [IV, C].
 

 


Figure 1. Algorithm for molecular diagnosis of Lynch syndrome.
aIf the loss of expression of MLH1 is concurrent with the loss of expression of MSH2 or MSH6 a germline genetic analysis should be recom- mended.
CRC, colorectal cancer; IHC, immunohistochemistry; MSI, microsatellite instability.
 
evidence does not allow definitive recommendations regarding ChT regimens based on the MMR or MSI status [33]. The MMR- or MSI-deficient status may be useful to determine the subset of stage II CRC patients who present a low risk of recurrence and in whom an adjuvant ChT may not be necessary [II, C] [34].
Several studies have demonstrated that MMR-deficient tumours harbour a high mutational load, and express numerous neoantigens that makes them sensitive to immunotherapy. Two immune checkpoint inhibitors have demonstrated substantial responses in patients with advanced MMR-deficient cancers and have received accelerated approval by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA): pembrolizumab for any MMR- deficient solid tumour and nivolumab for colorectal MMR- deficient tumours [15, 16].

Familial colorectal cancer X syndrome
This syndrome represents up to 40% of families who fulfil the Amsterdam criteria for hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer but do not harbour a tumour MMR deficiency or an underlying germline MMR gene alteration [35]. Risk of cancer in these fami- lies seems to be limited to the colorectum, and colonoscopy sur- veillance at 3–5-year intervals, starting at age 40 or 10 years earlier than the age at diagnosis of the youngest case in the family may be considered [IV, C].

 

Urinary tract surveillance. Urine cytology surveillance in individ- uals with LS has a poor sensitivity (29%) and a high rate of false- positive results, while the benefit of the US screening is unknown [30]. We only recommend urinary tract surveillance under a re- search protocol [IV, C].

Chemoprevention. The Colorectal Adenoma/Carcinoma Preven- tion Programme 2 (CAPP2) has shown a 60% reduction in the in- cidence of CRC- and other LS-associated tumours among those individuals treated with 600 mg daily aspirin taken for at least 2 years versus placebo [31]. Aspirin may be considered as a cancer prevention measure in individuals with LS, although the optimal dose has still not been determined and is the objective of the on- going CAPP3 study that compares daily aspirin at 600, 300 and 100 mg [I, C].

Environmental and lifestyle factors. Smoking and obesity increase the risk of adenomas and CRC in LS [32]. Patients are advised to refrain from smoking and stay within normal weight range [III, C].

Cancer treatment
Colorectal surgery. It has been shown that there was an increased risk of metachronous CRC after partial colectomy and that the quality of life was similar after partial and total colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA) [19]. Therefore, an extended colec- tomy may be an option in patients with LS undergoing primary surgery for CRC, especially in younger patients [IV, C].

Systemic treatment. Presence of MSI is a demonstrated prognos- tic factor and remains controversial as predictive for current chemotherapy (ChT) regimens in CRC and GC. Current
 
Constitutional mismatch repair-deficiency syndrome
Patients with biallelic mutations in one of the MMR genes are usually affected with childhood cancers. There is a high-incidence of CRC, adenomatous polyposis and small bowel tumours, haematological tumours (leukaemia or lymphoma), brain, endo- metrium and urinary tract tumours. Two expert consensuses have proposed a surveillance approach that includes semestral blood work and abdominal US, annual brain MRI, upper endos- copy and colonoscopy and consideration of annual whole-body MRI. Both consensuses acknowledge the lack of robust evidence and the need for more research [36, 37].
Lynch-like syndrome
This refers to patients who resemble LS due to the presence of MMR deficiency or MSI (excluding MLH1 hypermethylation) but lack a germline mutation. In these cases, MMR genetic testing on tumour DNA would recognise that 50%–70% of these cases harbour biallelic somatic mutations that might explain the abnormal IHC and/or MSI results [38]. Therefore, ruling out a sporadic somatic biallelic inactivation of these genes would spare an intensive surveillance of Lynch-associated tumours in relatives considered potentially at risk.


  Hereditary polyposis colorectal cancer  

 
 
Colorectal polyposis is a group of syndromes characterised by multiple polyps in the large intestine and an increased risk of CRC, as well as extraintestinal manifestations. Depending on the histology of the polyps, they are classified into adenomatous, serrated polyposis and hamartomatous polyposis.
 
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Prevalence and penetrance. FAP is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder associated with germline mutations in the ad- enomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene and characterised by the presence of multiple colorectal adenomas. In its classical form, FAP patients have a near 100% risk of developing CRC at an early age if prophylactic colectomy is not carried out. It represents
<1% of all cases of CRC and constitutes the most frequent cause of polyposis with a known genetic cause [39].

 
Clinical and molecular diagnosis. Clinical diagnosis is based on two main phenotypes, the classical form characterised by >100 adenomas along the entire colon, and the attenuated phenotype
that presents between 10 and 100 adenomas, preferentially local- ised in the right colon and with a later onset. It is associated with a broad spectrum of extracolonic tumours, including hepatoblas- toma in children, duodenal, pancreatic, thyroid and brain can- cers. Germline mutation in the APC gene is found in 80% of the classical FAP and only in 10% of attenuated cases [40]. Mutations located between codons 1250 and 1464 of the APC gene have been associated with more severe forms of FAP. In 30%–40% of cases, no family history of FAP is present, thus suggesting a de novo origin [41].
Full germline genetic testing should include both DNA sequencing and large rearrangement analysis; APC analysis should include large rearrangements [III, A]. With the incorpor- ation of multigene panels, the genetic testing can be carried out as a single analysis of multiple genes involved in colorectal adenomatous polyposis (APC, MUTYH, POLE, POLD1, NTHL1) [42, 43].

Surveillance and risk reduction. Surveillance should be done in all mutation carriers as well as in all members of any given family for whom the causative germline mutation cannot be identified (Tables 3 and 4).

Colorectal surveillance: In patients with classical FAP, flexible sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy should be carried   out every 2 years, starting at age 12–15 years [44]. Once adenomas are detected, colonoscopy should be carried out every 1–2 years until colectomy is planned. In patients with APC-attenuated FAP (AFAP), colonoscopic surveillance should be done   every 1–2 years, starting at the age of 18–20 years [III, C] [44].
Treatment of classical FAP is surgical and should be carried out before the age of 25 years. The choice of surgical technique [total colectomy with IRA or proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA)] depends on the age at diagnosis, severity of the polyposis, presence of rectal polyps and risk of developing desmoids [45]. Annual or biannual endoscopic follow-up is rec- ommended after surgery in patients with FAP [III, B].
Secondary chemoprevention with the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) has been shown to reduce the number and extent of colorectal adenomas and, less reliably, duo- denal adenomas. Due to the cardiovascular risk of NSAIDs (par- ticularly for cyclooxygenase-2 [COX-2] inhibitors), no single chemoprevention drug has an approved indication for the man- agement of FAP or MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP). Their use needs to be balanced with the side-effects [II, B] [46].
 















Gastric and small bowel surveillance: Fundic gland polyps are frequently found in FAP patients, while gastric neoplasias are un- common. Duodenal polyps are present in up to 90% of FAP patients, and duodenal cancer is the second cause of cancer death in FAP, with a cumulative lifetime risk of 5% [47]. Therefore, gastro- duodenal endoscopy surveillance is recommended every 5 years starting at 25–30 years of age or at the time of diagnosis of colonic polyposis for both classical FAP and AFAP patients [III, C]. If adenomas are detected, surveillance is guided by the Spigelman clas- sification based on the number, size and histology of adenomas (Table 5) [47]. For Spigelman stage I, the upper endoscopy is rec- ommended every 5 years and for Spigelman stage II every 3 years, while for more advanced stages the intervals should be shortened to every 1–2 years for Spigelman stage III and every 6 months or prophylactic surgery for Spigelman stage IV [III, B] [44]. Additional side-viewing endoscopic surveillance is recommended for patients with Spigelman stages III and IV and/or papillary involvement. Duodenal adenomas are usually managed by endoscopic polypec- tomy, although surgery (duodenectomy or duodenal- pancreatectomy) may be necessary in advanced cases. The risk of cancer in jejunum and ileum is extremely low; therefore, routine surveillance with endoscopic capsule is not recommended [V, C].

Extraintestinal surveillance: Some experts recommend annual thyroid palpation and/or ultrasonography, due to a 2% lifetime risk of thyroid cancer in FAP patients [44]. Surveillance for hepato- blastoma has been suggested with biannual determination of serum alpha foetoprotein levels and abdominal ultrasonography in chil- dren of patients with FAP, from birth to 7 years of age [IV, C] [48].
Development of desmoid tumours is mainly related to a posi- tive family history, abdominal surgery and site of the mutation and can occur inside the abdomen or in the abdominal wall. In this setting, regular physical examination and abdominal com- puted tomography or MRI should be carried out. The options for treatment include pharmacological treatment (NSAIDs
 

Table 4. Other polyposis syndromes surveillance guidelines
Syndrome	Site	Technique	Age (years)	Interval (years)
Attenuated FAP	Colorectal Duodenum	Colonoscopy
Gastroduodenal endoscopy (front and side view)	18–20
25–30	1–2
1–5a
MAP	Colorectal Duodenum	Colonoscopy
Gastroduodenal endoscopy (front and side view)	18–20
25–30	1–2
1–5a
PPAP	Colorectal	Colonoscopy	18–20	1–2
	Uterus	TV US	30–35	1
SP	Colorectal	Colonoscopy	45	1–2b
PJ	Colorectal	Colonoscopy	8c	1–3
Gastric	Gastroduodenal endoscopy	8c	1–3
Small bowel	Capsule endoscopy or MRI enterography	8c	1–3
		Pancreas	Endoscopic ultrasonography or MRI	30	1	
	Juvenile polyposis	Colorectal	Colonoscopy	15	1–3	
		Gastric	Gastroduodenal endoscopy	15	1–3	
	aPeriodicity according to the Spigelman stage.
bFDR: starting at 45 or 10 years earlier than the affected relative. If no polyps, repeat every 5 years.
cBasal colonoscopy at age 8. If negative for polyps, re-start surveillance at age 18.
FAP, familial adenomatous polyposis; FDR, ﬁrst-degree relative; MAP, MUTYH-associated polyposis; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PJ, Peutz–Jeghers; PPAP, polymerase proofreading-associated polyposis; SP, serrated polyposis; TV, transvaginal; US, ultrasound.	


 

 
and/or antioestrogens), ChT, surgical excision or radiotherapy [48].
MUTYH-associated polyposis
Prevalence and penetrance. MAP is an autosomal recessive syn- drome caused by biallelic germline mutations in the MUTYH gene and usually characterised by a phenotype of attenuated ad- enomatous polyposis and a lower risk of extracolonic manifesta- tions in comparison with FAP.
The development of polyps in individuals carrying biallelic mutations in the MUTYH gene usually begins in the second or third decade of life. A CRC risk of 19% at 50 years and 43% at 60 years (with a mean age of 48 years) has been described [49]. The risk of duodenal adenomas is low.

Clinical and molecular diagnosis. The clinical spectrum of
MUTYH   germline   mutations   is   heterogeneous,   including
 
attenuated and classic adenomatous polyposis, CRC without polyposis and Lynch-like syndrome. Biallelic MUTYH mutations should be suspected in patients with an attenuated form of aden- omatous polyposis or classical FAP with a recessive pattern of in- heritance. It should also be considered in CRC patients diagnosed before the age of 50 years, and in patients with multiple colonic
polyps (>10, including both adenomatous and serrated ones). The most prevalent mutations in the Caucasian population are
Y179C and G396D [40]; however, there exist ethnic and geo- graphical differences in the mutation landscape of this gene. The prevalence of MUTYH heterozygotes in the general population is 1%–2% [50].
Germline genetic testing should include all exons of MUTYH. With the incorporation of multigene panels, due to the sub- stantial overlap of the clinical phenotype of polyposis syndromes, we recommend a multigene single analysis of the genes involved in colorectal adenomatous polyposis (APC, MUTYH, POLE, POLD1, NTHL1) [V, B].


Surveillance and risk reduction.
Colorectal surveillance: In patients with MAP, a first colonoscopy is recommended at the age of 18–20 years, and every 1–2 years (Table 4). When the polyps cannot be controlled endoscopically, colectomy with IRA should be considered in absence of rectal involvement; however, if rectal involvement is substantial, a total proctocolectomy with IPAA is indicated. After surgery is carried out, it is recommended to continue with 1–2-year surveillance intervals of the remaining colorectal segment [III, C] [44].
CRC screening in monoallelic mutation carriers is recom- mended as for FDRs of a patient with sporadic CRC. There is no evidence of the usefulness of chemoprevention in this condition.
 
Gastric and small bowel surveillance: In most cases, the sur- veillance strategy with upper endoscopy is determined based on the monitoring of duodenal polyps, carrying out a first endos- copy at 25–30 years and continuing depending on the Spigelman stage (Table 5) [47].

Polymerase proofreading-associated polyposis
Recent studies have identified two genes with autosomal domin- ant inheritance associated with multiple adenomas and early- onset CRC: POLE and POLD1 [51]. Mutations in these genes have been related to different phenotypes that range from a classic phenotype with gastroduodenal involvement to attenuated forms or characteristic tumours of LS [52]. An approach similar to MAP is recommended with regular colonoscopy surveillance (Table 4).

Adenomatous polyposis associated with germinal mutation in NTHL1
Recent studies of whole exome sequencing have identified the as- sociation of biallelic germinal mutation of NTHL1 (16p13.3) with attenuated adenomatous polyposis. This new polyposis syn- drome has an autosomal recessive inheritance and probably an increased risk of EC in biallelic mutation carriers [53]. There are no specific recommendations for the management of these patients and an approach similar to MAP is recommended with regular colonoscopy surveillance.

Serrated polyposis syndrome
Prevalence and penetrance. Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS) is a condition characterised by the combination of large and/or nu- merous serrated lesions spreading throughout the colorectum with an increased lifetime risk of CRC (15%–30%). While preva- lence of SPS remains unknown, this syndrome is emerging as one of the most common CRC polyp syndromes [54, 55].

Clinical and molecular diagnosis. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria developed in 2019 [56], SPS is defined as:
Criterion 1: ≥5 serrated lesions/polyps proximal to the rec- tum, all being ≥5 mm in size, with ≥2 being ≥10 mm
in size;
Criterion 2: >20 serrated lesions/polyps of any size distrib- uted throughout the large bowel, with ≥5 being proximal
to the rectum.

Any histological subtype of serrated lesion/polyp (hyperplastic polyp, sessile serrated lesion without or with dysplasia, traditional serrated adenoma and unclassified serrated adenoma) is included in the final polyp count. The polyp count is cumulative over mul- tiple colonoscopies.
The genetic basis of SPS remains largely unknown. Biallelic MUTYH mutations have been reported in some patients fulfilling the WHO criteria, usually in the context of a concomitant attenu- ated form of adenomatous polyposis. Recently, RNF-43 germline mutations have been reported in some families with SPS [57].
 
Surveillance and risk reduction. Recent evidence suggests that surveillance with colonoscopy should be carried out every 1–2 years (it can be extended to 2 years in most patients based on certain risk factors, i.e. polyp multiplicity or advanced features) (Table 4) [III, C] [58, 59]. Although more evidence is needed, screening by colonoscopy every 5 years in FDRs of patients with SPS is commonly recommended, starting at the age of 45 years (or 10 years earlier than the age of diagnosis of the youngest affected family member) [60, 61]. There is no evidence to support extracolonic cancer surveillance in SPS patients [62].
Surgery is reserved to patients with CRC or those who cannot safely be managed endoscopically. Total colectomy with IRA is the technique of choice in patients with severe and recurrent polyposis, whereas segmental colectomy may be indicated in less severe cases. After colectomy, it is recommended to continue with 1–2-year sur- veillance intervals of the remaining colorectal segment [III, C].

Hamartomatous polyposis
Hamartomatous polyposis syndromes, such as Peutz–Jeghers syndrome (PJS) and juvenile polyposis syndrome are rare entities with diagnostic criteria and surveillance recommendations based on expert consensus (Table 4) [63] [IV, C].


 
The majority of GCs are sporadic. Familial clustering is observed in about 10% of the cases and 1%–3% are hereditary, encompassing hereditary diffuse GC (HDGC) and familial intestinal GC (FIGC). The stomach is also affected by gastric adenocarcinoma and prox- imal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS) syndrome that was recent- ly recognised as a rare variant of FAP. Furthermore, GC can develop in the setting of other hereditary cancer syndromes such as Li–Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), FAP, PJS, LS, hereditary breast/ ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOCS), MAP and juvenile polyposis. The lifetime risk of GC in these syndromes varies substantially be- tween populations studied but is generally low. A diagnostic algo- rithm for hereditary GC is shown in Figure 2.

Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer
Prevalence and penetrance. HDGC is an autosomal dominant cancer susceptibility syndrome characterised by signet ring cell (SRC) cancer/diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) and lobular breast cancer (LBC). CDH1 gene, encoding for E-cadherin, was identi- fied as a genetic cause of HDGC and recently the CTNNA1 gene, encoding a–E-catenin, has also been implicated [64, 65]. The in- cidence of heterozygous CTNNA1 germline mutation is low in families with DGC (~1%–2%).
HDGC accounts for <3% of the global burden of GC. The cu- mulative risk of DGC for CDH1 mutation carriers by the age of 80 years is reported to be 70% for men and 56% for women [66].
The cumulative risk of LBC for women with a CDH1 mutation is estimated to be 42% by 80 years. The age of onset of HDGC may be extremely variable (14–85 years).

Clinical and molecular diagnosis. Genetic testing for CDH1 is recommended in families with clinical criteria of HDGC [III, A], Testing of germline CDH1 alterations is recommended in
 

 
Figure 2. Algorithm for hereditary gastric cancer diagnosis.
aIncluding ﬁrst- or second-degree relatives.
DGC, diffuse gastric cancer; FIGC, familial intestinal gastric cancer; GAPPS, gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach; GC, gastric cancer; LBC, lobular breast cancer.
 
families that fulfil one of the following three criteria, according to the International Gastric Cancer Linkage Consortium (IGCLC) guidelines [66]:
•	Two or more documented cases of GC at any age in ﬁrst- or second-degree relatives, with at least one conﬁrmed DGC;
•	Personal history of DGC before the age of 40 years or
•	Personal or family history (ﬁrst- or second-degree relatives) of DGC and LBC, one diagnosed before the age of 50 years.
Genetic testing can be considered in families with bilateral or multiple cases of LBC before the age of 50 years, families with clustering of DGC and cleft lip/cleft palate and any patient diag- nosed with in situ or pagetoid spread of SRCs [66].
The age at which at-risk relatives should be genetically tested should take into consideration the earliest age of cancer onset in that family. Testing from the late teens or early 20s is favoured in families with early-onset DGC [66].
Germline genetic testing should include both DNA sequencing and large rearrangement analysis. The identification of germline CDH1 missense variants requires additional studies to assess their putative pathogenicity.

Surveillance and risk reduction.
Endoscopic surveillance and prophylactic surgery: Asymptomatic carriers of CDH1 pathogenic germline mutations are offered prophylactic gastrectomy or, for selected groups, annual endo- scopic surveillance [IV, B]. Surveillance with annual endoscopy
is recommended for individuals aged <20 years, for those who decline prophylactic gastrectomy unless they have a positive
biopsy, for those with comorbidities and for those with familial DGC and a variant of uncertain significance in CDH1. A minimum of 30 random biopsies in the endoscopy is recom- mended, as described in the Cambridge protocol [IV, B] [66]. Any malignant lesion detected endoscopically would prompt a referral for gastrectomy; however, all patients undergoing endoscopy for HDGC should be informed that given the very focal and often endoscopically invisible nature of these lesions, it is quite possible that lesions will not be detected by random biopsies.
Total gastrectomy is recommended between 20 and 30 years of age [IV, A]. In biopsy-positive individuals, a curative total gas- trectomy is advised, regardless of age. Prophylactic gastrectomy at an age of >75 years should be carefully considered.

Breast cancer surveillance: Annual breast MRI with mam- mography starting at age 30 is recommended in women with a CDH1 mutation [IV, B]. Annual clinical breast examination and breast cancer awareness by the patient and her physicians are essential.

Familial intestinal gastric cancer
Prevalence and penetrance. The diagnosis is considered when there is a family history of intestinal-type GC with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern.

Clinical and molecular diagnosis. In 1999, the IGCLC proposed diagnostic criteria analogous to the Amsterdam criteria in high- incidence countries (e.g. Portugal, Japan).
 
Criteria in low-incidence countries include:
•	At least two ﬁrst- or second-degree relatives affected by intes- tinal GC, one of them diagnosed before the age of 50 years, or
•	Three or more relatives with intestinal GC at any age [67].
The diagnosis is considered when there is a family history of intestinal-type GC in families without polyposis. The genetic cause of FIGC is currently unknown.

Surveillance and risk reduction. There is a lack of evidence to make robust recommendations for the management of individu- als at risk of FIGC [68] [V, C]. Eradication of H. pylori is advised in family members of patients with intestinal GC at <40 years or in families with clustering of FIGC.

Gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach
Prevalence and penetrance. GAPPS is an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome with a substantial risk of gastric, but not colorectal, adenocarcinoma [69].

Clinical and molecular diagnosis. Clinical criteria are required for the diagnosis of GAPPS:
•	Gastric polyps restricted to the body and fundus with no evi- dence of colorectal or duodenal polyposis;
•	>100 polyps carpeting the proximal stomach in the index case, or >30 polyps in an FDR of another case;
•	Mainly fundic gastric polyps, some with regions of dysplasia (or a family member with either dysplastic fundic gastric pol- yps or gastric adenocarcinoma);
•	Autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance;
•	Exclusions include other hereditary gastric polyposis syn- dromes and use of proton-pump inhibitors [69].
GAPPS presents with incomplete penetrance. The age of onset of GC is variable (23–75 years; median 50 years) and the typical carpeting fundic gland polyposis with dysplasia has been detected as early as 10 years of age.
The genetic defect was identified as point mutations in the pro- moter 1B of the APC gene that co-segregated with disease in six GAPPS families [70]. Therefore, GAPPS is considered as an FAP variant with a predominant gastric phenotype.

Surveillance and risk reduction. The management includes endo- scopic surveillance with random biopsies or preferably polypec- tomies directed to large/irregular polyps and, eventually, prophylactic gastrectomy. The limitations of endoscopic surveil- lance, the patient-specific risk of morbidity associated with prophylactic surgery and the risk of GC within the specific family need to be balanced [70, 71]. Due to the limited data available, individualised management is advised.


 
Prevalence and penetrance

Approximately 10% of patients with PC present a family cancer history. There are several hereditary syndromes associated with
 
Table 6. Summary of recommendations

Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer syndrome (Lynch syndrome)
●	Tumour testing with IHC for MMR proteins and/or MSI is recommended in individuals with CRC [III, A]
●	If loss of MLH1 is observed in the tumour, analysis of BRAF V600E mutation or analysis of the methylation of the MLH1 promoter should be carried out ﬁrst to rule out a sporadic case [III, B]
●	Somatic MMR gene testing for patients with unexplained abnormal tumour screening is suggested [III, B]
●	Clinical risk can be assessed using Amsterdam criteria II or the revised Bethesda guidelines
●	MMR IHC and/or MSI screening, with MLH1 promotor hypermethylation analysis in cases of MLH1 expression loss, is recommended for women with endometrial cancer [III, B]
●	Full germline genetic testing should include DNA sequencing and large rearrangement analysis [III, A]
●	Follow-up recommendations in mutation carriers include colonoscopy every 1–2 years [III, A], and gynaecological examination (with TV US, CA 125 and endometrial biopsy) on a yearly basis from age 30 to 35 years [IV, C]. In all cases, age of onset in the youngest member of the family is to be con- sidered and surveillance be started 5 years earlier [V, B]. High-quality colonoscopy carried out in dedicated centres is advised [IV, C]. UGI endoscopy surveillance (every 1–3 years, from age 30–35 years) may be considered in patients at high risk. Prophylactic gynaecological surgery might be an op- tion for female carriers who have completed childbearing or are postmenopausal [IV, C]
Cancer treatment
●	Extended colectomy may be an option in patients undergoing primary surgery for CRC [IV, C]
●	MMR or MSI status can be used to direct adjuvant ChT [II, C]
●	Advanced MMR-deﬁcient tumours may beneﬁt from pembrolizumab or nivolumab
Other syndromes
●	In familial CRC cancer X syndrome, colonoscopy surveillance (every 3–5 years) should generally start at age 40 years [IV, C]
●	In Lynch-like syndrome, MMR genetic testing rules out sporadic somatic biallelic mutations
Hereditary polyposis colorectal cancer syndromes
●	Patients with multiple colorectal adenomas (>10) should be considered for panel germline genetic testing that includes APC, MUTYH, POLE, POLD1 and NTHL1 genes. APC analysis should include large rearrangements [III, A]
●	In families with classic FAP, sigmoidoscopy should begin at the age of 12–15 years and be carried out every 1–2 years. Once adenomas are detected, colonoscopy should be carried out every 1–2 years until colectomy is planned. Surgery is indicated if there are large numbers of adenomas, or with a high degree of dysplasia [III, C]
●	In families with AFAP, colonoscopy should be carried out every 2 years starting at the age of 18–20 years and continued lifelong in mutation carriers. Surgery is indicated if there are large numbers of adenomas. Some patients with AFAP can be conservatively managed with annual colonoscopy and polypectomy [III, C]
●	The type of colorectal surgery in FAP (total colectomy þ IRA versus proctocolectomy þ IPAA) depends on the age of the patient, the severity of rectal
polyposis and the risk of developing desmoid tumours [III, B]
●	After colorectal surgery, surveillance of the rectum or pouch should be carried out [III, B]
●	In both classic FAP and AFAP, screening for extracolonic manifestations (gastroduodenal polyposis, thyroid cancer, desmoid tumours) should start when colorectal polyposis is diagnosed or at the age of 25–30 years, whichever comes ﬁrst [III, C]
●	If adenomas are detected, surveillance should be guided by the Spigelman classiﬁcation [III, B]
●	Duodenal adenomas are usually managed by endoscopic polypectomy, although surgery (duodenectomy or duodenal-pancreatectomy) may be ne- cessary in advanced cases
●	Regular physical examination and abdominal CT or MRI should be conducted in patients who are at risk of developing desmoid tumours, with treat- ment options including NSAIDs and/or antioestrogens, ChT, surgical excision or RT
MAP
●	Biallelic MUTYH mutations should be suspected in cases of AFAP or FAP with a recessive pattern of inheritance, diagnosis before the age of 50 years, and multiple colonic polyps
●	A multigene single analysis of APC, MUTYH (all exons), POLE, POLD1 and NTHL1 is recommended [V, B]
●	Colonoscopy should be conducted every 1–2 years from the age of 18–20 years
●	Where endoscopic control is not possible, IRA or IPAA, depending on the degree of rectal involvement, followed by annual endoscopic surveillance, is recommended [III, C]
●	CRC screening in monoallelic mutation carriers is recommended
●	UGI endoscopic surveillance of duodenal polyps should begin at age 25–30 years and continue according to the Spigelman stage
Other syndromes
●	For POLE- and POLD1-mutation-positive PPAP and NTHL1-mutation-positive adenomatous polyposis, colonoscopic surveillance should follow MAP recommendations
●	In SPS, colonoscopic surveillance should be carried out every 1-2 years (it can be extended to 2 years in most patients, based on risk factors)
●	In FDRs of patients with SPS, colonoscopic screening every 5 years, from age 45 years, is generally recommended
●	In SPS patients with CRC or where disease cannot be managed endoscopically, total colectomy with IRA or segmental colectomy are indicated, fol- lowed by annual surveillance [III, C]
Continued
 
HDGC
●	Genetic testing for CDH1 is recommended in families with clinical criteria of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer [III, A]
●	Testing of germline CDH1 alterations is recommended in families fulﬁlling at least one of the IGCLC guidelines criteria
●	Testing from late teens or early 20s is favoured in families with early-onset DGC
●	Germline testing should include both DNA sequencing and large rearrangement analysis
●	Annual endoscopy surveillance is recommended for individuals aged < 20 years, those declining gastrectomy and those with familial DGC and a
CDH1 variant of uncertain signiﬁcance
●	A minimum of 30 random biopsies is recommended [IV, B] and a curative gastrectomy is recommended for biopsy-positive individuals, regardless of age
●	Total gastrectomy is recommended between 20 and 30 years of age [IV, A]
●	Prophylactic gastrectomy is recommended in carriers of a pathogenic germline CDH1 mutation between 20 and 30 years [IV, A], and annual breast MRI in female mutation carriers starting at age 30 [IV, B]
●	Annual clinical breast examination and breast cancer awareness by the patient and her physicians are essential
Familial intestinal gastric cancer
●	The diagnosis of FIGC is considered when there is a family history of intestinal-type GC in families without polyposis
●	No robust recommendations can be made for the management of individuals at risk [V, C], but Helicobacter pylori eradication is advised in family members of patients with intestinal GC at < 40 years or in families with clustering of FIGC
Gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach
●	GAPPS is diagnosed according to the degree and distribution of gastric polyps and familial history
●	Management should be individualised and includes endoscopic surveillance, with random biopsies or polypectomies, and eventual prophylactic gastrectomy
Hereditary PC
●	Multigene panel testing, covering BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, CDKN2A, is recommended for families with a strong clustering of pancreatic cancer [IV, B]
●	Surveillance generally begins at age 50 years (or 10 years earlier than the age of the youngest affected relative) [IV, B], and annual endoscopic ultra- sonography and/or pancreatic MRI are the procedures of choice.
●	Patients with HP or PJS are recommended to start surveillance at age 30 and 40, respectively
●	For suspicious lesions, surgical intervention must be individualised
 ● Prophylactic pancreatectomy is not indicated in gene mutation carriers without any precursor lesion [V, A]	
AFAP, attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis; APC, adenomatous polyposis coli; CA 125, cancer antigen 125; ChT, chemotherapy; CRC, colorectal can- cer; CT, computed tomography; DGC, diffuse gastric cancer; FAP, familial adenomatous polyposis; FDR, ﬁrst-degree relative; FIGC, familial intestinal gastric cancer; GAPPS, gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach; GC, gastric cancer; HDGC, hereditary diffuse gastric cancer; HP, hereditary pancreatitis; IGCLC, International Gastric Cancer Linkage Consortium; IHC, immunohistochemistry; IPAA, ileal pouch-anal anastomosis; IRA, ileorectal anasto- mosis; MAP, MUTYH-associated polyposis; MMR, mismatch repair; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MSI, microsatellite instability; NSAID, non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug; PC, pancreatic cancer PJS, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome; RT, radiotherapy; SPS, serrated polyposis syndrome; TV, transvaginal; UGI, upper gastrointestinal; US, ultrasound.


 
an increased risk of PC: HBOCS, familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM), LS, FAP, ataxia telangiectasia (ATM), PJS and hereditary pancreatitis (HP). Of these syndromes, PJS and HP are associated with the highest accumulated risk for PC (36% and 18%–53%, respectively) [72, 73].


Clinical and molecular diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually based upon clinical criteria of the different syndromes associated, followed by a confirmation with a genetic test. These hereditary cancer syndromes account for approxi- mately 10%–15% of hereditary PC cases, and the most common cause of hereditary PC is a mutation in the BRCA2 gene [74].
In most families, the cause of hereditary PC is not identified. This is known as familial PC (FPC) and applies to families with two or more FDRs with PC who do not fulfil the criteria of any other inherited tumour syndrome. FPC accounts for 80% of clusters of families with PC. Some recent studies have reported germline mutations in the most frequent genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, CDKN2A) related to hereditary pancreatic syndromes, even without other extrapancreatic manifestations. This suggests
 
that a multigene panel approach in families with a strong cluster- ing of PC is adequate [IV, B] [74].

Surveillance of high-risk patients
There is no solid evidence that screening is associated with a de- crease in morbidity and mortality related to PC [28, 62, 75]. Based upon the International Cancer of the Pancreas Screening (CAPS) Consortium consensus, surveillance for PC is recom- mended in the following high-risk patients [28]:
•	Individuals with three or more blood relatives affected with PC, with at least one affected FDR;
•	Individuals with at least two affected FDRs with PC;
•	Patients with PJS, regardless of family history of PC;
•	CDKN2A/p16 carriers with one affected FDR;
•	BRCA2 mutation carriers with one affected FDR (or two affected family members, no FDR) with PC;
•	PALB2 mutation carriers with one affected FDR; and
•	MMR gene mutation carriers (LS) with one affected FDR.
Currently, annually endoscopic ultrasonography and/or pan- creatic MRI are the procedures of choice for surveillance [62].
 

 



 
Surveillance programmes usually begin at age 50 (or 10 years ear- lier than the age of the youngest affected relative) [IV, B]. Patients with HP or PJS are recommended to start surveillance at age 30 and 40, respectively.

Surgical management in patients at high-risk for pancreatic cancer
If a suspicious lesion is detected, no consensus has been reached with respect to the extension of pancreatic resection (partial or total pancreatectomy). In this setting, a multidisciplinary team is needed and surgical intervention must be individualised. In gene mutation carriers without any precursor lesion, prophylactic pancreatectomy is not indicated [V, A].


 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development (http://www.esmo.org/ Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology). The relevant lit- erature has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of recommendations is shown in Table 6. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 7. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.


 
The ESMO Guidelines Committee would like to thank the ESMO Faculty and other experts who provided critical reviews of these ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines.
 

 
 
No external funding has been received for the preparation of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.


 
EM has received honoraria for lecture and advisory boards for Roche, Amgen, Servier and Sanofi; AC has received honoraria for lecture and advisory boards for Merck Serono, Amgen, Servier, Roche, Lilly, Novartis, Takeda, Astellas, Beigene, Bayer and Foundation Medicine and research funding from Genentech, Merck Serono, Roche, Beigene, Bayer, Servier, Lilly, Novartis, Takeda, Astellas, Fibrogen, Amcure, Sierra Oncology, AstraZeneca, Medimmune, Bristol-Myers Squibb and MSD; JB, NS, LM, FC and FB have declared no potential conflicts of interest.

 
1.	Lynch HT, de la Chapelle A. Hereditary colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2003; 348(10): 919–932.
2.	Engel C, Loeffler M, Steinke V et al. Risks of less common cancers in pro- ven mutation carriers with Lynch syndrome. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30(35): 4409–4415.
3.	Win AK, Young JP, Lindor NM et al. Colorectal and other cancer risks for carriers and noncarriers from families with a DNA mismatch repair gene mutation: a prospective cohort study. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30(9): 958–964.
4.	Samadder NJ, Smith KR, Wong J et al. Cancer risk in families fulfilling the Amsterdam criteria for Lynch syndrome. JAMA Oncol 2017; 3(12): 1697–1701.
5.	Moller P, Seppala T, Bernstein I et al. Cancer incidence and survival in Lynch syndrome patients receiving colonoscopic and gynaecological sur- veillance: first report from the prospective Lynch syndrome database. Gut 2017; 66: 464–472.
 
6.	Hamilton SR, Liu B, Parsons RE et al. The molecular basis of Turcot’s syndrome. N Engl J Med 1995; 332(13): 839–847.
7.	Misago N, Narisawa Y. Sebaceous neoplasms in Muir–Torre syndrome. Am J Dermatopathol 2000; 22(2): 155–161.
8.	Wimmer K, Kratz CP, Vasen HF et al. Diagnostic criteria for constitu- tional mismatch repair deficiency syndrome: suggestions of the European consortium ‘care for CMMRD’ (C4CMMRD). J Med Genet 2014; 51(6): 355–365.
9.	Durno CA, Sherman PM, Aronson M et al. Phenotypic and genotypic characterisation of biallelic mismatch repair deficiency (BMMR-D) syn- drome. Eur J Cancer 2015; 51(8): 977–983.
10.	Hampel H, Frankel WL, Martin E et al. Feasibility of screening for Lynch syndrome among patients with colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26(35): 5783–5788.
11.	Hampel H, Pearlman R, Beightol M et al. Assessment of tumor sequenc- ing as a replacement for Lynch syndrome screening and current molecu- lar tests for patients with colorectal cancer. JAMA Oncol 2018; 4(6): 806–813.
12.	Vasen HF, Watson P, Mecklin JP, Lynch HT. New clinical criteria for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, Lynch syndrome) proposed by the International Collaborative group on HNPCC. Gastroenterology 1999; 116(6): 1453–1456.
13.	Umar A, Boland CR, Terdiman JP et al. Revised Bethesda Guidelines for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome) and micro- satellite instability. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004; 96(4): 261–268.
14.	Moreira L, Balaguer F, Lindor N et al. Identification of Lynch syndrome among patients with colorectal cancer. JAMA 2012; 308(15): 1555–1565.
15.	Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H et al. PD-1 blockade in tumors with mismatch-repair deficiency. N Engl J Med 2015; 372(26): 2509–2520.
16.	Overman MJ, McDermott R, Leach JL et al. Nivolumab in patients with metastatic DNA mismatch repair-deficient or microsatellite instability- high colorectal cancer (CheckMate 142): an open-label, multicentre, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18(9): 1182–1191.
17.	Pearlman R, Frankel WL, Swanson B et al. Prevalence and spectrum of germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations among patients with early- onset colorectal cancer. JAMA Oncol 2017; 3(4): 464–471.
18.	Yurgelun MB, Kulke MH, Fuchs CS et al. Cancer susceptibility gene mutations in individuals with colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35(10): 1086–1095.
19.	Moller P, Seppala T, Bernstein I et al. Incidence of and survival after sub- sequent cancers in carriers of pathogenic MMR variants with previous cancer: a report from the prospective Lynch syndrome database. Gut 2017; 66: 1657–1664.
20.	Kastrinos F, Uno H, Ukaegbu C et al. Development and validation of the PREMM5 Model for comprehensive risk assessment of Lynch syndrome. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35(19): 2165–2172.
21.	Jarvinen HJ, Renkonen-Sinisalo L, Aktan-Collan K et al. Ten years after mutation testing for Lynch syndrome: cancer incidence and outcome in mutation-positive and mutation-negative family members. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 4793–4797.
22.	Vasen HF, Abdirahman M, Brohet R et al. One to 2-year surveillance intervals reduce risk of colorectal cancer in families with Lynch syn- drome. Gastroenterology 2010; 138(7): 2300–2306.
23.	Dove-Edwin I, Sasieni P, Adams J, Thomas HJ. Prevention of colorectal cancer by colonoscopic surveillance in individuals with a family history of colorectal cancer: 16 year, prospective, follow-up study. BMJ 2005; 331(7524): 1047.
24.	Moller P, Seppala TT, Bernstein I et al. Cancer risk and survival in
path_MMR carriers by gene and gender up to 75 years of age: a report from the Prospective Lynch Syndrome Database. Gut 2018; 67: 1306–1316.
25.	Ten Broeke SW, van der Klift HM, Tops CMJ et al. Cancer risks for
PMS2-associated Lynch syndrome. J Clin Oncol 2018; 36(29): 2961–2968.
26.	Rahmi G, Lecomte T, Malka D et al. Impact of chromoscopy on aden-
oma detection in patients with Lynch syndrome: a prospective, multicen- ter, blinded, tandem colonoscopy study. Am J Gastroenterol 2015; 110(2): 288–298.
 
27.	Vasen HF, Blanco I, Aktan-Collan K et al. Revised guidelines for the clin- ical management of Lynch syndrome (HNPCC): recommendations by a group of European experts. Gut 2013; 62(6): 812–823.
28.	Canto MI, Harinck F, Hruban RH et al. International Cancer of the Pancreas Screening (CAPS) Consortium summit on the management of patients with increased risk for familial pancreatic cancer. Gut 2013; 62(3): 339–347.
29.	Schmeler KM, Lynch HT, Chen LM et al. Prophylactic surgery to reduce the risk of gynecologic cancers in the Lynch syndrome. N Engl J Med 2006; 354(3): 261–269.
30.	Myrhoj T, Andersen MB, Bernstein I. Screening for urinary tract cancer with urine cytology in Lynch syndrome and familial colorectal cancer. Fam Cancer 2008; 7: 303–307.
31.	Burn J, Gerdes AM, Macrae F et al. Long-term effect of aspirin on cancer risk in carriers of hereditary colorectal cancer: an analysis from the CAPP2 randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2011; 378(9809): 2081–2087.
32.	Oines M, Helsingen LM, Bretthauer M, Emilsson L. Epidemiology and risk factors of colorectal polyps. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2017; 31: 419–424.
33.	Sinicrope FA, Shi Q, Allegra CJ et al. Association of DNA mismatch re- pair and mutations in BRAF and KRAS with survival after recurrence in stage III colon cancers: a secondary analysis of 2 randomized clinical tri- als. JAMA Oncol 2017; 3(4): 472–480.
34.	Tejpar S, Saridaki Z, Delorenzi M et al. Microsatellite instability, progno- sis and drug sensitivity of stage II and III colorectal cancer: more com- plexity to the puzzle. J Natl Cancer Inst 2011; 103(11): 841–844.
35.	Lindor NM, Rabe K, Petersen GM et al. Lower cancer incidence in Amsterdam-I criteria families without mismatch repair deficiency: famil- ial colorectal cancer type X. JAMA 2005; 293(16): 1979–1985.
36.	Tabori U, Hansford JR, Achatz MI et al. Clinical management and tumor surveillance recommendations of inherited mismatch repair deficiency in childhood. Clin Cancer Res 2017; 23(11): e32–e37.
37.	Vasen HF, Ghorbanoghli Z, Bourdeaut F et al. Guidelines for surveillance of individuals with constitutional mismatch repair-deficiency proposed by the European Consortium “Care for CMMR-D” (C4CMMR-D). J Med Genet 2014; 51(5): 283–293.
38.	Haraldsdottir S, Hampel H, Tomsic J et al. Colon and endometrial can- cers with mismatch repair deficiency can arise from somatic, rather than germline, mutations. Gastroenterology 2014; 147(6): 1308–1316.
39.	Karstensen JG, Burisch J, Pommergaard HC et al. Colorectal cancer in individuals with familial adenomatous polyposis, based on analysis of the Danish polyposis registry. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019 [Epub ahead of print].
40.	Grover S, Kastrinos F, Steyerberg EW et al. Prevalence and phenotypes of APC and MUTYH mutations in patients with multiple colorectal adeno- mas. JAMA 2012; 308(5): 485–492.
41.	Bisgaard ML, Fenger K, Bulow S et al. Familial adenomatous polyposis
(FAP): frequency, penetrance, and mutation rate. Hum Mutat 1994; 3(2): 121–125.
42.	Feliubadalo L, Lopez-Fernandez A, Pineda M et al. Opportunistic testing of BRCA1, BRCA2 and mismatch repair genes improves the yield of phenotype driven hereditary cancer gene panels. Int J Cancer 2019; 145: 2682–2691.
43.	Taylor A, Brady AF, Frayling IM et al. Consensus for genes to be included
on cancer panel tests offered by UK genetics services: guidelines of the UK Cancer Genetics Group. J Med Genet 2018; 55: 372–377.
44.	Vasen HF, Moslein G, Alonso A et al. Guidelines for the clinical manage- ment of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Gut 2008; 57(5): 704–713.
45.	Melnitchouk N, Saadat LV, Bleday R, Goldberg JE. A decision analysis for rectal-sparing familial adenomatous polyposis: total colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis versus proctocolectomy with IPAA. Dis Colon Rectum 2019; 62(1): 27–32.
46.	Solomon SD, Wittes J, Finn PV et al. Cardiovascular risk of celecoxib in 6 randomized placebo-controlled trials: the cross trial safety analysis. Circulation 2008; 117(16): 2104–2113.
47.	Groves CJ, Saunders BP, Spigelman AD, Phillips RK. Duodenal cancer in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP): results of a 10 year prospective study. Gut 2002; 50(5): 636–641.
 
48.	Groen EJ, Roos A, Muntinghe FL et al. Extra-intestinal manifestations of fa- milial adenomatous polyposis. Ann Surg Oncol 2008; 15(9): 2439–2450.
49.	Croitoru ME, Cleary SP, Di Nicola N et al. Association between biallelic and monoallelic germline MYH gene mutations and colorectal cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004; 96(21): 1631–1634.
50.	Balaguer F. Hereditary and familial colorectal cancer. Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014; 37(Suppl 3): 77–84.
51.	Bellido F, Pineda M, Aiza G et al. POLE and POLD1 mutations in 529 kindred with familial colorectal cancer and/or polyposis: review of reported cases and recommendations for genetic testing and surveillance. Genet Med 2016; 18(4): 325–332.
52.	Esteban-Jurado C, Gimenez-Zaragoza D, Munoz J et al. POLE and POLD1 screening in 155 patients with multiple polyps and early-onset colorectal cancer. Oncotarget 2017; 8(16): 26732–26743.
53.	Weren RD, Ligtenberg MJ, Kets CM et al. A germline homozygous muta- tion in the base-excision repair gene NTHL1 causes adenomatous polyp- osis and colorectal cancer. Nat Genet 2015; 47(6): 668–671.
54.	Moreira L, Pellise M, Carballal S et al. High prevalence of serrated polyp- osis syndrome in FIT-based colorectal cancer screening programmes. Gut 2013; 62(3): 476–477.
55.	Carballal S, Rodriguez-Alcalde D, Moreira L et al. Colorectal cancer risk factors in patients with serrated polyposis syndrome: a large multicentre study. Gut 2016; 65(11): 1829–1837.
56.	Bosman F, Carneiro F, Hruban R, Theise N. WHO Classification of Tumours of the Digestive System, 5th edition. IARC, Lyon 2019 [in press].
57.	Gala MK, Mizukami Y, Le LP et al. Germline mutations in oncogene- induced senescence pathways are associated with multiple sessile serrated adenomas. Gastroenterology 2014; 146(2): 520–529.
58.	Bleijenberg AG, IJspeert JE, van Herwaarden YJ et al. Personalised sur- veillance for serrated polyposis syndrome: results from a prospective 5- year international cohort study. Gut 2019 [Epub ahead of print].
59.	Rodriguez-Alcalde D, Carballal S, Moreira L et al. High incidence of advanced colorectal neoplasia during endoscopic surveillance in serrated polyposis syndrome. Endoscopy 2019; 51(2): 142–151.
60.	Boparai KS, Mathus-Vliegen EM, Koornstra JJ et al. Increased colorectal cancer risk during follow-up in patients with hyperplastic polyposis syn- drome: a multicentre cohort study. Gut 2010; 59(8): 1094–1100.
61.	East JE, Atkin WS, Bateman AC et al. British Society of Gastroenterology position statement on serrated polyps in the colon and rectum. Gut 2017; 66(7): 1181–1196.
62.	Syngal S, Brand RE, Church JM et al. ACG clinical guideline: genetic test- ing and management of hereditary gastrointestinal cancer syndromes. Am J Gastroenterol 2015; 110(2): 223–262.
 
63.	Ngeow J, Heald B, Rybicki LA et al. Prevalence of germline PTEN, BMPR1A, SMAD4, STK11, and ENG mutations in patients with moderate-load colorectal polyps. Gastroenterology 2013; 144(7): 1402–1409.
64.	Hansford S, Kaurah P, Li-Chang H et al. Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer syndrome: CDH1 mutations and beyond. JAMA Oncol 2015; 1(1): 23–32.
65.	van der Post R, Oliveira C, Guilford P, Carneiro F. Hereditary gastric can- cer: what’s new? Update 2013–2018. Fam Cancer 2019; 18(3): 363–367.
66.	van der Post RS, Vogelaar IP, Carneiro F et al. Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: updated clinical guidelines with an emphasis on germline CDH1 mutation carriers. J Med Genet 2015; 52(6): 361–374.
67.	Caldas C, Carneiro F, Lynch HT et al. Familial gastric cancer: overview and guidelines for management. J Med Genet 1999; 36(12): 873–880.
68.	Corso G, Roncalli F, Marrelli D et al. History, pathogenesis, and manage- ment of familial gastric cancer: original study of John XXIII’s family. Biomed Res Int 2013; 2013: 1.
69.	Worthley DL, Phillips KD, Wayte N et al. Gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS): a new autosomal dominant syndrome. Gut 2012; 61(5): 774–779.
70.	Li J, Woods SL, Healey S et al. Point mutations in Exon 1B of APC reveal gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach as a familial adenomatous polyposis variant. Am J Hum Genet 2016; 98(5): 830–842.
71.	McDuffie LA, Sabesan A, Allgaeuer M et al. Beta-catenin activation in fundic gland polyps, gastric cancer and colonic polyps in families afflicted by ‘gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stom- ach’ (GAPPS). J Clin Pathol 2016; 69(9): 826–833.
72.	Korsse SE, Harinck F, van Lier MG et al. Pancreatic cancer risk in Peutz–Jeghers syndrome patients: a large cohort study and implications for surveillance. J Med Genet 2013; 50(1): 59–64.
73.	Weiss FU. Pancreatic cancer risk in hereditary pancreatitis. Front Physiol 2014; 5: 70.
74.	Zhen DB, Rabe KG, Gallinger S et al. BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, and CDKN2A mutations in familial pancreatic cancer: a PACGENE study. Genet Med 2015; 17(7): 569–577.
75.	Vasen H, Ibrahim I, Ponce CG et al. Benefit of surveillance for pancreatic cancer in high-risk individuals: outcome of long-term prospective follow-up studies from three European expert centers. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34(17): 2010–2019.
76.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33(2): 139–144.
