
 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
 
Annals of Oncology 28 (Supplement 4): iv84–iv99, 2017 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx221
 

 

 

E. Le Rhun1,2,3, M. Weller4, D. Brandsma5, M. Van den Bent6, E. de Azambuja7, R. Henriksson8,9,
T. Boulanger10, S. Peters11, C. Watts12, W. Wick13,14, P. Wesseling15,16, R. Rud`a17 & M. Preusser18, on behalf of the EANO Executive Board and ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Neuro-Oncology, Department of Neurosurgery, Lille University Hospital, Lille; 2Neurology, Medical Oncology Department, Oscar Lambret Center, Lille; 3Lille
University, Inserm U-1192, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France; 4Department of Neurology and Brain Tumour Center, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland; 5Department of Neuro-Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam; 6The Brain Tumour Center at the Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 7Medical Oncology Department, Institut Jules Bordet and L’Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles (U.L.B), Brussels, Belgium; 8Regional Cancer Center, Stockholm; 9Department of Radiation Sciences and Oncology, University, Umea, Sweden; 10Neuroradiology, Imaging Department, Oscar Lambret Center, Lille, France; 11Department of Oncology, University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland; 12Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 13Neurology Clinic, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg; 14Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuro-Oncology, German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; 15Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Centre and Brain Tumour Center, Amsterdam; 16Department of Pathology, Princess M´axima Center for Paediatric Oncology and University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; 17Department of Neuro-Oncology, City of Health and Science Hospital, University of Turin, Turin, Italy; 18Clinical Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine 1, CNS Unit Comprehensive Cancer Centre (CCC-CNS), Medical University, Vienna, Austria

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via L. Taddei 4, CH-6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org or EANO Ofﬁce, c/o WMA GmbH | Alser Strasse 4, 1090 Vienna, Austria; E-mail: ofﬁce@eano.eu
†These Guidelines were developed by the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology (EANO).

The two societies nominated authors to write the guidelines as well as reviewers to comment on them. These guidelines were approved by the EANO Executive Board and the ESMO Guidelines Committee in May 2017.



 

 
These EANO–ESMO joint recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of leptomeningeal metastasis (LM) from solid can- cers represent the first European guideline initiative on this topic. LM is defined as the spread of tumour cells within the leptomen- inges and the subarachnoid space, is synonymous with ‘neoplas- tic meningitis’ and can be further denoted by primary tumour as leptomeningeal carcinomatosis, gliomatosis or lymphomatosis. The recommendations address LM from solid tumours, but nei- ther LM from primary brain tumours nor LM from lymphoma or leukaemia. They cover prevention, diagnosis, therapy and follow- up, but not differential diagnosis, adverse effects of therapeutic measures or supportive or palliative care. We propose diagnostic criteria as well as a neuroimaging- and cytopathology-based classification of LM syndromes to derive pragmatic treatment algorithms. We also assign levels of certainty to the diagnosis of
 
LM to provide guidance when to treat (as opposed to when to in- tensify diagnostic efforts) and on which patients to include in clinical trials. Given the low level of evidence, the recommenda- tions are based more on expert opinion and consensus than on evidence from informative clinical trials. Still, the EANO–ESMO multidisciplinary recommendations shall serve as a valuable source of information for physicians, other health care providers, as well as informed patients and relatives.


 
LM may be diagnosed in approximately 10% of patients with metastatic cancer in the course of disease [1]. The incidence is probably underestimated because of non-specific symptoms and signs, lack of sensitivity to diagnostic procedures and limited
 

VC   The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
therapeutic options. Breast cancer, lung cancer and melanoma represent the three most common causes of LM, but LM may be observed with all malignant tumours. LM occurs in the context of progressive systemic disease in approximately 70% of solid cancer patients with LM, in around 20% at the time of first progression after initial treatment, but in up to 10% already at the time of diag- nosis. In recent large cohorts of LM patients, brain metastases were associated with LM in 33%–54% of breast cancer, 56%–82% of lung cancer and 87%–96% of melanoma patients [2–20].
Risk factors for the development of LM include opening of the ventricular system during brain metastasis surgery or resec- tion of cerebellar metastases, especially when using a piecemeal resection [21–26]. In a large cohort of patients with brain meta- stasis, the incidence of LM was higher in patients treated with surgery followed by stereotactic radiosurgery than in patients treated with radiosurgery alone [27].
Patients with lobular subtype and triple-negative tumours have a relatively higher risk of LM than patients with other types of breast cancer [28]. In recent cohorts, primary breast tumours causing LM were ductal carcinoma in 51%–78%, lobular carcin- oma in 26%–35%, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2)-positive in 10%–29% (up to 47% in only one series) and triple negative in 22%–40.5% [2–7, 9–12, 28].
Lung tumours causing LM were adenocarcinomas in 84%– 96% [13–16, 19]. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mu- tant lung cancer may have a central nervous system (CNS) trop- ism [29–31]. Metastatic CNS involvement has also been recognised as an emerging complication in patients with anaplas- tic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [32, 33]. In a second-line trial for ALK-positive disease, approximately 35% of ALK-positive patients had brain metasta- sis at the time of study entry [34].
Only a few large cohorts of melanoma patients with LM have been reported and risk factors, including LM risk-associated molecular profiles (e.g. BRAF mutation status), have not been identified.
The role of cerebrospinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in addition to standard extracerebral staging during the follow- up of patients at high risk of LM (e.g. with triple-negative or lob- ular breast cancer) has not been evaluated.

Recommendation:
•	LM should be considered in particular in patients with breast or lung cancer or melanoma who present with neurological symptoms or signs [EANO: III, C; ESMO: III, B].


 
Median survival is poor and limited to 6–8 weeks without tumour-specific treatment whereas survival may be prolonged to a few months with LM-directed treatment, including targeted therapy and immunotherapy: 1.75–4.5 months in breast cancer, 3–6 months in lung cancer and 1.7–2.5 months in melanoma (co- horts of more than 30 patients published within the last 10 years) [2–7, 9–20, 28]. Published survival rates at 1 year were 16%–24%
for breast cancer [5, 12], 19% for lung cancer [13, 18] and 7% for melanoma patients [19]. Performance status at diagnosis of LM is the most important prognostic factor, as shown by multivariate analysis. Other frequently reported prognostic factors include
 
primary tumour type, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein levels, administration of combined modality treatment, systemic treat- ment or intra-CSF treatment, and initial clinical or CSF responses to treatment [2–5, 9–11, 35–39]. In contrast, an association of whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) with overall survival (OS) has not been consistently reported [13–16, 28].


 
The invasion of the leptomeninges by tumour cells may occur by haematogenous spread through the arterial or venous circulation, or endoneural, perineural, perivascular or lymphatic spread, es- pecially from breast and lung cancers. Furthermore, there may be a direct invasion from brain or spinal parenchymal metastases in contact with the CSF, the choroid plexus and from subependymal metastases [40–42]. Iatrogenic spread may occur after neurosur- gical interventions, notably when lesioning the ventricles [22]. De novo tumours originating in the leptomeninges with melanoma histology are also observed, but represent a distinct disease entity [43]. Once seeded in the meninges, tumour cells may disseminate along the meningeal and ependymal surfaces or with the CSF flow, with a predilection of colonising regions of slow CSF flow and gravity-dependent locations, e.g. posterior fossa, basilar cis- terns and lumbar cistern [40]. Molecular factors facilitating seed- ing of the leptomeninges by tumour cells have not been identified.


 
Symptoms and signs are related to the specific CNS areas involved by LM and thus are typically multifocal. The most fre- quent manifestations at presentation [2, 3, 5–7, 11, 13, 15, 18–20, 44] are as follows:
•	headache;
•	nausea and vomiting;
•	mental changes;
•	gait difﬁculties;
•	cranial nerve palsies, e.g. with diplopia or visual disturbance (cranial nerve VI, III, IV, II) and hearing loss (cranial nerve VIII);
•	radicular signs including weakness, voiding and cauda equina problems; and
•	focal or irradiating (radicular) neck and back pain.
Some of these symptoms and signs are in part or largely related to increased intracranial pressure due to CSF circulation disturb- ances and can be rapidly alleviated by lowering intracranial pres- sure through CSF drainage. Patients may also present with subtle isolated symptoms and signs. Bladder, sexual and bowel dysfunc- tion are possibly underreported and should be explored at pres- entation and during the course of the disease. To ensure appropriate clinical management strategies, symptoms or signs due to parenchymal metastases, extracranial disease, side-effects of treatments or non-cancer comorbidities should be distin- guished from LM-related neurological symptoms and signs. A detailed neurological examination is required and a standard evaluation form should be used for the clinical evaluation of pa- tients at diagnosis and during follow-up [1]. The Neurologic
 
Assessment in Neuro-Oncology (NANO) criteria used to assess neurological function in brain tumour patients [45] are unlikely to be useful in LM patients because they do not address the multi-level involvement of the CNS typically seen in LM.

Recommendations:
•	Typical clinical signs of LM such as headache, nausea and vomiting, mental changes, gait difﬁculties, cranial nerve pal- sies with diplopia, visual disturbances, hearing loss, sensori- motor deﬁcits of extremities and cauda equine syndrome, radicular, neck and back pain, notably in a patient with can- cer, should alert clinicians to consider LM [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].
•	A detailed neurological examination using a standard evalu- ation form, e.g. as proposed by the Leptomeningeal Assessment in Neuro-Oncology (LANO) group, should be carried out at diagnosis [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].


 
Neuroimaging

Cerebrospinal MRI without and with contrast enhancement using at least 1.5-T field strength is the ‘gold standard’ for the
 
comprehensive neuroradiological assessment of patients with suspected LM (Table 1) [46]. Characteristic MRI findings include sulcal enhancement or obliteration, linear ependymal enhance- ment, cranial nerve root enhancement and leptomeningeal enhancing nodules, notably of the cauda equina. Prospective sys- tematic studies addressing sensitivity and specificity of MRI in distinguishing LM from other diseases with a similar MRI pattern have not been conducted. Sensitivity and specificity of cerebro- spinal MRI remain difficult to appreciate due to a limited number of publications in patients with a suspicion of LM and improve- ment of technique over time, but have been estimated in the range of 66%–98% and 77%–97.5%, respectively [47–50]. In re- cently reported cohorts, 68%–97% of patients with a diagnosis of LM based on presence of tumour cells in the CSF or on typical clinical and MRI findings had radiological evidence of LM on cerebrospinal MRI, indicating that the diagnosis of LM is infre- quently made in patients with a normal MRI [2–5, 7, 9–11, 14,
16–20, 39, 44].
The neuroradiological assessment of LM is challenging. Contrast enhancement can be complex in geometry and small in volume [1]. Several technical issues, such as slice positioning and thickness, time interval between contrast injection and image acquisition influence the sensitivity and specificity of neuro- imaging. Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences are probably the most sen- sitive for the detection of LM [51, 52]. Gadolinium should be
 

Table 1. Evaluation of suspected LM
Recommended protocols of evaluation	Results

 
Clinical
evaluation
 
Standardised neurological evaluation [1]	Presence of typical clinical signs of LMa Any other neurological abnormality Normal neurological evaluation
 
Neuroimaging Brain: axial T1-weighted, axial FLAIR, axial diffusion, axial T2-weighted post-gadolinium 3D T1-weighted and post-gadolinium 3D FLAIR sequences.
Spinal axis: post-gadolinium sagittal T1-weighted sequences. Spine sag- ittal T1-weighted sequences without contrast and sagittal fat suppres- sion T2-weighted sequences, combined with axial T1-weighted images with contrast of regions of interest, may also be considered.
CSF cytology	Fresh CSF samples should be processed within 30 min after sampling when feasible; alternatively, fresh CSF samples can be ﬁxed with ethanol/Carbowax (CSF/ﬁxative ratio 1 : 1)
CSF volume is ideally > 10 mL but at least 5 mL
Routine staining for cytological analysis: Pap/Papanicolaou and (in freshly processed CSF samples) Giemsa
Additional immunocytochemical staining (upon indication and avail- ability of material) for epithelial and melanocytic markers; in case of haematological malignancy in the differential diagnosis, consider immunostainings for lymphoid cells and/or ﬂow cytometry analysis of the CSF sample
A second CSF sample should be analysed if the initial CSF sample is negative
 
Typical MRI ﬁndings of linear LM (type A)b
Typical MRI ﬁndings of nodular leptomeningeal disease (type B)

Both (type C)
No neuroimaging evidence of LM, except possibly hydrocephalus (type D)

Positive: presence of tumour cells Equivocal: suspicious or atypical cells Negative: absence of tumour cells
 

aTypical clinical signs of LM include headache, nausea and vomiting, mental changes, gait difﬁculties, cranial nerve palsies with diplopia, visual disturb- ances, hearing loss, sensorimotor deﬁcits of extremities and cauda equine syndrome, and radicular neck and back pain.
bSee Table 2 and text.
CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; FLAIR, ﬂuid-attenuated inversion recovery; LM, leptomeningeal metastasis; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
 
injected 10 min before data acquisition at a dose of 0.1 mmol/kg. The slice thickness should be ≤ 1 mm. As recommended by the LANO group, nodules should be defined as ≥ 5 × 10 mm in or- thogonal diameters [1] and should be distinguished from linear
contrast enhancement. As meningeal contrast enhancement may also be observed after lumbar puncture or ventricular shunt place- ment, cerebrospinal MRI should be obtained before such proced- ures whenever feasible. Communicating hydrocephalus is observed in 11%–17% of patients [9, 16]. Cerebrospinal MRI also detects brain metastasis, epidural spinal cord compression and intramedullary spinal cord metastases. Cranial computed tomog- raphy (CT) should be limited to patients with contraindications for MRI and mainly helps to identify nodular disease. 18F-fluoro- deoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomog- raphy (FDG-PET–CT) is rarely useful for the diagnosis of LM [53]. CSF flow studies using intra-CSF application of tracers, such as 111Indium-diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) or 99Technetium macro-aggregated albumin, have been recom- mended for patients considered candidates for intra-CSF pharma- cotherapy, as obstruction to CSF flow may impede coverage of the target volume of drug distribution [1]. CSF flow abnormalities have been observed in 61%–70% of patients in small cohorts of non-selected patients with LM [54, 55]. Blocks can be partial or complete and can occur at the base of the brain, in the spinal sub- arachnoidal space and over the cerebral convexities.

Recommendations:
•	The diagnostic work-up should include cerebrospinal MRI. Brain MRI should include axial T1-weighted, axial FLAIR, axial diffusion, axial T2-weighted, post-gadolinium 3D T1-weighted and post-gadolinium 3D FLAIR sequences. Spinal MRI should include post-gadolinium sagittal T1-weighted sequences. Spine sagittal T1-weighted sequences without contrast and sagittal fat suppression T2-weighted se- quences, combined with axial T1-weighted images with con- trast of regions of interest, may also be considered [EANO: III, C; ESMO: II, B].
•	CSF ﬂow studies should be considered for patients in whom CSF ﬂow obstruction may be present, e.g. hydrocephalus, large nodules potentially reducing the CSF circulation on MRI, unexpected toxicity of intra-CSF treatment, and who are candidates for intra-CSF pharmacotherapy [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: IV, C].
CSF analysis
Non-diagnostic pathological findings upon routine CSF analysis are observed in more than 90% of LM patients and include
increased opening pressure (> 200 mm H2O) in 21%–42% [16, 44], increased leukocyte counts (> 4/mm3) in 48%–77.5% [2, 10,
16, 44], elevated protein (> 50 mg/dL) in 56%–91% [2, 3, 10, 16,
44] and decreased glucose (<60 mg/dL) in 22%–63% [2, 10, 16, 44]. However, only the identification of malignant cells in the CSF
or in a leptomeningeal biopsy establishes the diagnosis of LM (gold standard). The results of CSF cytology studies are commonly quali- tative and sensitivity is low, although specificity is high. In recent large cohorts of LM patients, CSF cytology was considered positive in 66%–90% [3]. CSF cytology should be reported as:
1.	positive, deﬁned by the presence of malignant cells in the CSF;
 
2.	equivocal, corresponding to the detection of ‘suspicious’ or ‘atypical’ cells in the CSF; or
3.	negative, deﬁned as the absence of malignant or equivocal cells in the CSF.
A distinction of suspicious and atypical as proposed by the LANO group [1] is difficult to use in clinical practice. Staining of neoplastic cells for specific alterations such as the HER2 protein in breast cancer or BRAFV600E protein in melanoma by immuno- cytochemistry may be useful in selected equivocal cases. The fol- lowing simple measures may improve the sensitivity of CSF
studies: obtaining sufficient volumes of CSF (ideally > 10 mL, but at least 5 mL), processing CSF within 30 min after sampling and
avoiding haemorrhagic contamination [1, 56–58]. A higher sensi- tivity was reported with thin-layer preparations (Thinprep) than with cytospin-coupled Wright–Giemsa stains [59]. In patients suspected of having LM, CSF analysis should be carried out under optimal conditions. If the first CSF analysis is negative, a second lumbar puncture should be carried out under optimised condi- tions as outlined above, potentially increasing the sensitivity to 80%. The yield of further CSF assessments remains doubtful. CSF fixation in dedicated tubes as established for haematological dis- orders [60], such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) CSF sample storage tubes or CellSaveTM preservative tubes, may di- minish the need for rapid processing of the sample, but reports on the validation of this approach for solid tumours are lacking.
Novel techniques using epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) antibodies or other tumour-specific antibody-covered magnetic nanoparticles to identify circulating tumour cells have shown promis- ing results using various adaptations of the device initially designed for peripheral blood studies, combined with flow cytometry or tu- mour marker immunofluorescent in situ hybridisation (TM-iFISH). Such approaches may improve the sensitivity for tumour cell detec- tion in the CSF but need validation in prospective studies [45, 61–67]. Genomic alterations can be detected in the CSF by micro-arrays [68], digital or real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and targeted amplicon sequencing, and whole exome sequencing [69–72]. Yet, there are still insufficient data to substitute a positive CSF cytology by the detection in the CSF of tumour-specific mutations at DNA level,
e.g. BRAFV600E or EGFRT790M. It remains unclear whether tumour DNA detection in the CSF compartment always reflects the local pres- ence of cells or whether this DNA may be derived from tumour cells circulating in the blood or even from distant extracerebral metastases. Future studies need to address the question of which quantitative cut- off of tumour DNA in CSF truly represents clinically relevant LM.
Numerous CSF biomarkers of LM have been explored in a tumour- specific manner, including b-glucuronidase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), b2-microglobulin, cancer antigen (CA) 15-3, CA 125, CA 19- 9, a-foetoprotein (AFP), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), or Cyfra 21-1 as direct tumour markers, or molecules thought to be involved in the metastatic process, specifically angiogenesis [e.g. vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1], migration and invasion [e.g. matrix met- alloprotease (MMP)-2 and -9, cathepsins B, C and H], or adhesion and inflammation [e.g. C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 8 (CXCL-8)/ interleukin-8, CXCL-10/interferon-inducible protein-10 and CCL18]. The role of these CSF biomarkers in clinical practice is limited, except for AFP or b-human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in patients with germ cell tumours, which are not covered by this guideline.
 
Recommendation:
•	CSF studies with optimised analysis conditions must be car- ried out as part of the diagnostic work-up. One repeat lumbar puncture with optimised analysis conditions should be car- ried out in patients with suspected LM and initial negative or equivocal CSF studies [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].

Biopsy
Rarely, leptomeningeal biopsies may be required to confirm the diagnosis of LM. It may be useful when CSF cytology is repeatedly negative, when there is no history of cancer or if there are doubts about the cause of the clinical and imaging features and if thera- peutic interventions are clinically indicated.

Diagnostic criteria for LM
The diagnosis of LM may be challenging, and several subtypes of syndromes collectively referred to as LM can be distinguished based on clinical findings, neuroimaging features and CSF ana- lysis. In every case of suspected LM, it should be assessed whether any clinical abnormalities are causally related to LM detected by neuroimaging or CSF analysis. In most contemporary clinical tri- als, LM is diagnosed based on the detection of malignant cells in the CSF or on suggestive clinical and neuroimaging findings in patients with cancer. We propose to classify LM by using two major criteria:
1.	Has the diagnosis been veriﬁed cytologically or histologically: yes (type I) or no (type II)?
2.	What are the neuroimaging ﬁndings: linear leptomeningeal disease (type A), nodular leptomeningeal disease (type B), both (type C) or neither nor, e.g. no neuroimaging evidence of LM except possibly hydrocephalus (type D)? Type C should be assigned if the less prevalent phenotype (A or B) still accounts for an estimated disease burden of at least 20%.
Based on these considerations, the likelihood of LM can be as-
signed ‘confirmed’, ‘probable’, ‘possible’ or ‘no evidence for’ (Table 2). This classification provides guidance when to treat with relative confidence (‘confirmed’, ‘probable’) and when to re- consider intensified diagnostic efforts at establishing a firm
 
diagnosis (‘possible’, ‘no evidence for’). Patients meeting criteria for ‘no evidence for’ should not receive LM-directed tumour-spe- cific treatment, but should receive a follow-up evaluation if the clinical suspicion of LM remains. Furthermore, we propose that clinical trials should only enrol patients with confirmed or prob- able LM, and should stratify for this certainty level of diagnosis.


 
The aim of treatment of LM is to prolong survival with acceptable quality of life, and to prevent or delay neurological deterioration. Several tumour-specific approaches can be used in isolation or combination. Recommendations for the treatment modalities for LM described below are not supported by data from randomised clinical trials; they are based on uncontrolled case series and ex- pert opinion and current management strategies vary widely across Europe [73].

Pharmacotherapy: general considerations
Based on the assumption that intravenous (i.v.) antitumour agents will distribute in the same way as i.v. administered contrast agents, there is a priori no reason to believe that systemic pharma- cotherapy for contrast-enhancing manifestations of LM should be less efficient than for other systemic manifestations of cancer. Moreover, increased CSF protein levels in most LM patients con- firm that the blood–CSF barrier is commonly disrupted in LM and that there must be, therefore, increased levels of systemically administered drugs in the CSF of most patients with LM. However, floating tumour cells in the CSF in the setting of little or no blood–CSF barrier dysfunction or diffuse leptomeningeal or ependymal spread not yet accompanied by blood–brain bar- rier dysfunction may be poorly covered by systemic pharmaco- therapy. Importantly, in the absence of blood–CSF barrier disturbances, drug distribution into the CSF depends mainly on drug transport across the choroid plexus and not across the blood–brain barrier [74]. No specific prospective trials have been reported on systemic treatment of LM, but retrospective series suggest some activity of systemic chemotherapy [75–77]. As there
 

 
 
are very limited data on the efficacy of targeted agents in LM, it re- mains uncertain whether these agents improve the prognosis of LM.
As for patients with brain metastasis [78], the best systemic treatment of LM is determined by the primary tumour, its mo- lecular characteristics or the molecular characteristics of tumour cells of the CSF (when available) and prior treatment of the underlying malignancy.

LM from breast cancer
Common treatments administered in breast cancer patients with CNS metastases include capecitabine, cyclophosphamide, 5-fluo- rouracil (5-FU), methotrexate (MTX), vincristine, cisplatin, eto- poside, vinorelbine and gemcitabine. No trial has specifically evaluated the role of trastuzumab in treating brain metastasis; however, a clinical benefit has been reported in patients with HER2-positive tumours treated for newly diagnosed brain meta- stasis [79, 80]. The efficacy of lapatinib was limited in brain meta- stasis patients when used alone [81–83], but promising when combined with capecitabine [82–86]. Only very limited data are available on the efficacy of trastuzumab-emtansine (T-DM1) in treating brain metastasis [87–89].
There are hardly any systematic studies of LM treatment in pa- tients with breast cancer [90]. A concordance of 94% has been re- ported between the HER2 status of primary tumours and the tumour cells in the CSF [91]. In HER2-positive tumours with LM, anti-HER2 treatment in combination with chemotherapy should be considered. More data are also needed on the efficacy of bevacizumab in combination with various chemotherapies in LM patients [92]. Occasional responses of LM have been reported with hormonal agents. However, tumours are often resistant to hormonal therapy at the time of LM diagnosis.

LM from lung cancer
A platinum based-combination (including pemetrexed, gemcita- bine, paclitaxel or vinorelbine for non-squamous and unselected NSCLC, respectively) can be chosen for treating brain metastasis from lung cancer [93, 94]. The addition of bevacizumab to clas- sical chemotherapy might be beneficial for the treatment of brain metastasis in NSCLC [95].
EGFR mutations are observed in 11% of the Caucasian popula- tion with lung cancer [96] and predict benefit from first- (gefiti- nib, erlotinib) and second-generation (afatinib) EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) [13, 14, 16, 18, 29, 97–101], as well as the third-generation inhibitor osimertinib in the case of TKI resist- ance [102]. In several small cohorts, a preservation of the EGFR status was noted in the CSF relative to the primary tumour [18, 70, 72, 98]. Erlotinib may achieve higher CSF concentrations than gefitinib [103]. New EGFR TKIs such as osimertinib have shown promising results in a phase I trial on LM in patients who had progressed on prior EGFR TKI therapy [104]. Combinations of EGFR TKIs with other agents await exploration.
ALK rearrangements and MET mutations are found in 3%–5% and 4% of NSCLC, respectively. Crizotinib, which targets ALK, proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase (ROS) and MET, repre- sents the first targeted option for ALK-rearranged NSCLC patients [105]. Ceritinib, alectinib, lorlatinib or brigatinib may be
 
used after progression under crizotinib according to expert opin- ion. Accumulating evidence suggests a better CNS penetration of these compounds; however, only a few reports on the efficacy of second- or third-generation TKIs on LM are available [106]. HER2, MET and BRAF mutations as well as RET and ROS re- arrangement have rarely been reported in lung cancer patients with LM. Appropriate inhibitors could represent therapeutic op- tions once such a target has been identified. Only preliminary data are available on the efficacy of anti-programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) agents such as nivolumab [107, 108] or pembrolizumab
[109] or anti-PD ligand 1 such as atezolizumab [110] in NSCLC patients with brain metastasis [111]. Data on the efficacy of im- munotherapy for brain metastasis or LM are limited because such patients are commonly excluded from clinical trials.


LM from melanoma
Systemic chemotherapy using classical agents such as temozolo- mide, dacarbazine or fotemustine has only limited efficacy in melanoma patients with brain metastasis or LM. Ipilimumab, an antibody to anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4, has shown ef- ficacy in patients with brain metastasis [112, 113]. Anti-PD-1 antibodies have shown activity against extracerebral disease. However, only preliminary data are available for brain metastasis [111].
BRAF mutations are observed in 40%–60% of melanomas and a concordance of BRAF status of 100% has been observed be- tween primary tumour and brain metastasis [114]. Responses have been reported in brain metastasis or LM patients with BRAF inhibitors such as vemurafenib [115, 116] or dabrafenib [117]. Although some emerging approaches have shown promising re- sults in the control of extracerebral disease, only limited data are available on the efficacy of MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK) inhibitors (trametinib, selumetinib, pimarsertib) or the combination of
BRAF and MEK inhibitors (dabrafenib þ trametinib, vemurafenib þ cobimetinib) in patients with CNS metastases or, specifically, LM from melanoma [20].


Other solid tumours
No specific data are available for the treatment of LM caused by other tumours, and treatments should be selected according to the primary tumour and its prior treatment.


High-dose systemic chemotherapy
Cytotoxic CSF concentrations of MTX, cytarabine or thiotriethy- lenephosphoramide (thioTEPA) may be achieved using high- dose systemic administration, and these agents have induced re- sponses in LM from various solid tumours [76, 118–120]. The major limitations of these approaches are haematological toxicity and their incompatibility with other systemic regimens poten- tially needed for the control of systemic disease.

Recommendation:
•	Systemic pharmacotherapy based on primary tumour and previous treatment should be considered for most patients with type B/C LM [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].
 
Intra-CSF pharmacotherapy
Although no randomised trial has demonstrated that intra-CSF chemotherapy prolongs survival in LM patients, intra-CSF pharmacotherapy is used by the majority of physicians treating LM patients across Europe [73]. Due to its limited penetration into solid tumour lesions, e.g. up to 1–3 mm [121, 122], intra- CSF pharmacotherapy is mainly considered for patients with type A LM and a significant tumour cell load in the CSF (Table 2). Furthermore, intra-CSF pharmacotherapy should not be admin- istered to patients with symptomatic hydrocephalus who require ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement or with a ventricular device without on/off option.
When intra-CSF pharmacotherapy is used, the administration may be done through repeated lumbar punctures or preferably through a subgaleal reservoir and intraventricular catheter. An equivalent or larger volume of CSF should be removed before each intra-CSF injection. After lumbar injection, patients should remain in a flat position for 1 h [123].
The conceptual advantages of the ventricular route include the certainty that the drug is not delivered into the epidural or sub- dural space instead of the CSF compartment, a more uniform dis- tribution of the agent, greater patient comfort and a faster procedure, which improves compliance and safety of drug ad- ministration. The latter is particularly true for patients requiring anticoagulation [124–126]. The safety of ventricular devices has been shown in several cohorts of patients using different technol- ogies and several devices, but careful handling is required to en- sure aseptic puncture and drug application to minimise the risk of infectious complications [126–128]. The best surgical proced- ure has to be defined by the neurosurgeon in charge of the pa- tient. No benefit of ventricular versus lumbar route has been demonstrated; however, a longer progression-free survival for MTX was observed in a sub-study of a randomised trial using the ventricular route. In contrast, there was no significant difference using liposomal cytarabine, presumably due to the different half- lives of these agents [124]. New approaches such as ventriculo- lumbar perfusion are interesting, but require further study [129].
 
Three agents are commonly used for the intrathecal treatment of LM: MTX, cytarabine, including liposomal cytarabine, or thioTEPA. Thus, the compounds routinely used for intra-CSF treatment do not have a key role as single agents for systemic treatment of most common cancers causing LM. Different sched- ules have been proposed for these agents, without consensus on optimal dose, frequency of administration or optimal duration of treatment (Table 3). No intra-CSF agent has shown a significant survival advantage over another [130, 131]. Combined intra-CSF agents have not demonstrated superiority over single intra-CSF agents [132], yet, longer time to neurological progression was re- ported in LM patients with liposomal cytarabine than in those pa- tients treated with MTX [131]. Toxicities of the various intra-CSF agents differed. More mucositis or neurological complications such as headache were observed with MTX than with thioTEPA [130]. For MTX and liposomal cytarabine, Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB)-expanded Common Toxicity Criteria treatment-related
grade ≥ 3 toxicity was similar [131]. In a subanalysis, a greater quality-adjusted survival, measured by quality-adjusted time with-
out symptoms or toxicity (Q-TWIST), was observed in patients treated with liposomal cytarabine than with MTX [133].
The efficacy and tolerance of intra-CSF trastuzumab in HER2- positive breast cancer is under evaluation in two trials (NCT01325207, NCT01373710). A small pooled analysis of 17 patients with HER2-positive breast cancer from 13 publications treated by intra-CSF trastuzumab reported clinical improvement in 69% of patients, with a median OS of 13.5 months [134].
A critical review of the randomised trials on LM, five of which enrolled patients with solid tumours [75, 125, 130–132] (Supplementary Table S1, available at Annals of Oncology online), all assessing the response to intra-CSF therapy, revealed a lack of standardisation for the evaluation of response and methodo- logical limitations with respect to the type of tumour (haemato- logical versus solid), baseline evaluation, response to treatment and evaluation of safety, and all experienced long times for ac- crual [46]. Moreover, all were open-label studies. Only cohort studies have been reported in recent years.
 


Table 3. Characteristics and schedules of administration of intra-CSF therapy
Agent


Methotrexate	Description


Folate anti-metabolite, cell cycle speciﬁc	Half-life in the CSF

4.5–8 h	Recommended schedules of administration
10–15 mg twice weekly (total, 4 weeks), then 10–15 mg once weekly (total, 4 weeks) then 10–15 mg once monthly	Prophylaxis of adverse events


Folinic acid rescue, 25 mg × 6h for 24 h starting 6 h after administration
Cytarabine	Pyrimidine nucleoside ana- logue, cell cycle speciﬁc	< 1 h	10 mg twice weekly (total, 4 weeks) then 10 mg once weekly (total, 4 weeks)
then 10 mg once a month	None
Liposomal cytarabine	Pyrimidine nucleoside ana- logue, cell cycle speciﬁc	14–21 days	50 mg every 2 weeks (total, 8 weeks) then 50 mg once a month	Oral steroids, e.g. 6 mg dexa- methasone equivalent daily
(d1–d4)
ThioTEPA	Alkylating ethyleneimine compound, cell cycle non- speciﬁc	3–4 h	10 mg twice weekly (total, 4 weeks) then 10 mg once weekly (total, 4 weeks) then 10 mg once a month	None
CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; thioTEPA, thiotriethylenephosphoramide.
 
One single trial tried to explore the value of adding intra- ventricular MTX to systemic therapy and involved-field radio- therapy (RT), but the trial was prematurely closed [75]. A total of 35 breast cancer patients with LM were evaluated based on clinical findings only. No differences for clinical response or OS were observed, but more treatment-related neurotoxicity, scored ac- cording to a local scale, was noted in the intra-CSF chemotherapy arm (47% versus 6%). The complication rate in the intra-CSF chemotherapy arm, with 18% of reservoir revisions, was also high
compared with other cohorts (< 7.3% of reservoir revision) [126– 128]. The role of adding intra-CSF chemotherapy using liposomal
cytarabine to systemic therapy in breast cancer patients with LM is readdressed in an ongoing phase III trial (NCT01645839).
The optimal duration of intra-CSF treatment has also not been adequately explored. Most patients nowadays are treated until progression or for 1 year, if tolerated. In the absence of evidence from appropriate clinical trials, clinical symptoms and MRI and CSF findings, as well as tolerance of treatment, guide individual decisions on the duration of treatment. Notably, the role of per- sisting positive CSF cytology alone for decision-making regarding the continuation of treatment remains controversial [1].

Recommendations:
•	Intra-CSF pharmacotherapy should be considered for most patients with type IA/C LM [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].
•	Intra-CSF pharmacotherapy should be administered through the ventricular rather than lumbar route whenever feasible [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].

Radiotherapy
No randomised clinical trial to assess the efficacy and tolerance of RT in LM has been conducted. Focal RT administered in fractio- nated regimens such as involved-field or stereotactic RT or ad- ministered in single fractions (radiosurgery) can be used to treat nodular disease and symptomatic cerebral or spinal sites.
In exceptional cases, focal RT can be carried out for cauda equina syndrome or cranial nerve palsies after exclusion of other causes, even in the absence of corresponding MRI findings. The presence of CSF flow interruptions is associated with decreased survival [54, 55, 135]. Restoration of CSF flow obstruction can be obtained by focal RT in 30% of patients with spinal blocks and in 50% of patients with intracranial blocks [136] and has been proposed to reduce the toxicity from, and enhance the efficacy of, intra-CSF therapy.
Typical target volumes for RT in the presence of cranial neuro- pathies include, by expert consensus, the skull base, the interpe- duncular cistern and the two first cervical vertebrae. Typical target volumes for RT in the presence of a cauda equina syn- drome include the lumbosacral vertebrae. WBRT may be con- sidered for extensive nodular or symptomatic linear LM or co- existing brain metastasis. Yet, no association of WBRT with sur- vival was observed in retrospective studies of LM patients [13, 14, 15, 18, 28]. Cerebrospinal RT is rarely an option for adult patients with LM from solid cancers because of risk of bone marrow tox- icity, enteritis and mucositis, and the usual co-existence of sys- temic disease. Concomitant craniospinal RT and systemic or intra-CSF treatment should be avoided to prevent severe toxicity, notably myelosuppression. Up to 20% of grade 3–4 adverse events have been reported in a phase II trial evaluating
 
concomitant intra-CSF MTX plus dexamethasone with focal RT for patients with LM from various solid tumours [137]. Intra- CSF administration of radioisotopes or radiolabelled monoclonal antibodies should be explored in the context of clinical trials.

Recommendations:
•	Focal RT should be considered for circumscribed, notably symptomatic lesions [EANO: IV, n.a.; ESMO: V, n.a.].
•	WBRT can be considered for extensive nodular or sympto- matic linear LM [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].


 
Diagnosis and management of patients with LM should follow multidisciplinary tumour board recommendations throughout the disease course. The therapeutic strategy should consider gen- eral health and the neurological status of the patient, histological and molecular subtype of the primary cancer, extent and available therapeutic options for extra-CNS disease, clinical and imaging presentation of LM, and presence of concomitant brain metasta- sis. The therapeutic recommendations summarised in Figure 1 and Table 4 are largely based on retrospective cohort data or ex- pert agreements and must be considered as having a low level of evidence. Randomised clinical trials with adapted methodology and standardised criteria for diagnosis and response are needed to better define the role of all therapeutic interventions in LM.


 
No robust data are available and monitoring recommendations today are still based on consensus and expert opinion. The LANO group has made efforts to determine criteria to evaluate the re- sponse to treatment in LM patients [1] (Supplementary Table S2, available at Annals of Oncology online). Although the proposal by the LANO group remains controversial largely because of its complexity, we concur with the view that response should be evaluated according to a complete neurological assessment, a neuroimaging evaluation and standard CSF cytology. CSF par- ameters other than the detection of tumour cells are not con- sidered (Table 5). Symptoms and signs related to concomitant brain metastasis, extracerebral progression, toxicity induced by treatments or concurrent diseases must not be considered for the evaluation of LM response. As most neurological deficits in LM patients are irreversible, the best anticipated clinical response is usually achievement of stable disease. A complete cerebrospinal MRI is required for the evaluation of response. During follow-up, MRI should preferably be repeated using the same scanner or at least a scanner of identical field strength (Table 1). Other imaging modalities such as MR spectroscopy, MR perfusion or PET have no role so far in the assessment of LM during follow-up. The LANO group has proposed an MRI grid for the assessment of radiographic response, which needs to be validated. Due to small volume and geometric complexity, a quantitative assessment is often not possible, and LM lesions may be difficult to measure re- liably. Thus, it has been proposed to distinguish ‘measurable’ LM
disease defined by at least one nodular lesion of more than 5 ×
10 mm from ‘non-measurable’ disease which encompasses all
 







































Figure 1. Therapeutic approach to LM.
This decision tree is based on expert agreement. When selecting therapeutic options, systemic pharmacotherapy should always be considered. A modiﬁcation of systemic pharmacotherapy is recom- mended in patients with progressive extracranial disease as well as in patients with progressive BM, unless RT alone is a preferred option. Intra-CSF pharmacotherapy is recommended in case of ﬂoating tumour cell load in the CSF and is optional in case of linear metastatic meningeal disease. Intra-CSF pharmacotherapy is not recommended in patients with symptomatic hydrocephalus who require ven- triculoperitoneal shunt placement or with a ventricular device without on/off option or in patients with nodular meningeal metastases only. Focal RT is recommended for the treatment of nodular disease and symptomatic metastatic cerebral or spinal sites. WBRT may be an option for extensive nodular or symptomatic linear LM or co-existing BM. Note that RT options refer to treatment of LM only.
BM, brain metastases; CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; ECD, extracranial disease; IT, intrathecal; LM, leptomeningeal metastases; RT, radiotherapy; WBRT, whole brain radiotherapy; þ, recommended; (þ), optional;
—, not recommended.
 
Table 4. Key recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of LM from solid tumours
 

EANO [146]	ESMO [147]
 

Level of evidence
 

Grade of recommendation
 

Level of evidence
 

Grade of recommendation
 

Diagnostic procedures
LM should be considered in particular in patients with breast or lung cancer or melanoma who present with neurological symptoms or signs
Typical clinical signs of LM such as headache, nausea and vomiting, mental changes, gait difﬁculties, cranial nerve palsies with diplopia, visual disturbances, hearing loss, sensorimotor deﬁcits of extremities and cauda equine syndrome, radicular, neck
and back pain, notably in a patient with cancer, should alert clinicians to consider LM
A detailed neurological examination using a standard evaluation form, e.g. as proposed by the LANO group, should be carried out at diagnosis
The diagnostic work-up should include cerebrospinal MRI. Brain MRI should include axial T1-weighted, axial FLAIR, axial diffusion, axial T2-weighted, post-gadolinium 3D
T1-weighted and post-gadolinium 3D FLAIR sequences. Spinal MRI should include
post-gadolinium sagittal T1-weighted sequences. Spine sagittal T1-weighted sequences without contrast and sagittal fat suppression T2-weighted sequences, combined with axial T1-weighted images with contrast of regions of interest, may also be considered
CSF ﬂow studies should be considered for patients in whom CSF ﬂow obstruction may be present, e.g. hydrocephalus, large nodules potentially reducing the CSF circulation on MRI, unexpected toxicity of intra-CSF treatment, and who are candidates for
intra-CSF pharmacotherapy
CSF studies with optimised analysis conditions must be carried out as part of the diagnostic work-up. One repeat lumbar puncture with optimised analysis conditions should be carried out in patients with suspected LM and initial negative or equivocal CSF studies
Therapeutic strategies
Systemic pharmacotherapy based on primary tumour and previous treatment should be considered for most patients with type B/C LM
 


III	C

IV	n/a




IV	n/a

III	C






IV	n/a




IV	n/a




IV	n/a
 


III	B

V	n/a




V	n/a

II	B






IV	C




V	n/a




V	n/a
 
Intra-CSF pharmacotherapy should be considered for most patients with type IA/C LM	IV	n/a	V	n/a
 
Intra-CSF pharmacotherapy should be administered through the ventricular rather than lumbar route whenever feasible
 
IV	n/a
 
V	n/a
 
Focal RT should be considered for circumscribed, notably symptomatic lesions	IV	n/a WBRT can be considered for extensive nodular or symptomatic linear LM	IV	n/a
Monitoring and follow-up
 
V	n/a
V	n/a
 
A detailed neurological examination using a standard evaluation form should be carried out every 2–3 months or at radiological progression or when new neurological symptoms or signs are reported
Cerebrospinal MRI should be carried out every 2–3 months or at any instance of suspected clinical progression
CSF studies should be carried out every 2–3 months in patients undergoing intra-CSF pharmacotherapy
 
IV	n/a


IV	n/a

IV	n/a
 
V	n/a


V	n/a

V	n/a
 

Level of evidence and grade of recommendation according to Brainin (EANO recommendations) or Dykewicz (ESMO recommendations) [146, 147].
CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; EANO, European Association of Neuro-Oncology; ESMO, European Society for Medical Oncology; FLAIR, ﬂuid-attenuated inver- sion recovery; LANO, Leptomeningeal Assessment in Neuro-Oncology; LM, leptomeningeal metastasis; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; n/a, not applic- able; RT, radiotherapy; WBRT, whole brain radiotherapy.


 
other MRI abnormalities [1]. Changes in size, but not changes in intensity of contrast enhancement, should be considered. Changes in hydrocephalus should be considered as part of the response evaluation in clinical practice, but were not included in the LANO
 
MRI grid. In clinical trials, concomitant brain or extradural spinal metastases are evaluated separately for response.
CSF cell counts could, in principle, be obtained specifically for tumour, as opposed to non-neoplastic cells, but this has
 
Table 5. EANO–ESMO response assessment in LMa
Clinical	Imaging	CSF	Response determination	Action

Improved or stable   Improved	Improved or stable   Response	Continue treatment
Stable	Stable	Stable	Stable	Continue treatment
 
Worse	Improved or stable
 
Improved or stable   Suspicion of progression	Consider alternative neurological diagnoses or other
reasons for clinical deterioration; change treatment only if there is no other explanation and if there is signiﬁcant worsening of clinical signs for more than 2 weeks
 
Improved or stable  Improved or
stable


Worse	Improved or stable
 
Worse	Suspicion of progression, or progres- sion in case of de novo appearance of tumour cells in the CSFb

Worse	Suspicion of progression, or progres- sion in case of de novo appearance of tumour cells in the CSFb
 
Continue treatment, change treatment if appearance of tumour cells is conﬁrmed on two consecutive CSF studies from the same CSF site (lumbar or ven- tricular) at least 4 weeks apart
Consider alternative neurological diagnoses, continue treatment; change treatment if there is worsening of clinical signs for more than 2 weeks and if ap- pearance of tumour cells is conﬁrmed on two con- secutive CSF studies from the same CSF site (lumbar or ventricular) at least 4 weeks apart
 
Improved or stable  Worse	Improved or stable  Progression	Change treatment
Improved or stable  Worse	Worse	Progression	Change treatment
 
Worse	Worse	Improved or stable or worse
 
Progression	Change treatment
 

aDifferences from the LANO recommendations are illustrated in Supplementary Table S2, available at Annals of Oncology online.
bDe novo detection of tumour cells as an indicator of progressive disease requires that there were at least two adequately performed negative CSF analyses.
CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; EANO, European Association of Neuro-Oncology; ESMO, European Society for Medical Oncology; LANO, Leptomeningeal Assessment in Neuro-Oncology; LM, leptomeningeal metastasis.


 
remained challenging and would require more sophisticated techniques than commonly available. As discussed above, the proposal by the LANO group to classify the standard CSF cy- tology results into two groups of patients, negative or atypical, versus positive or suspicious, appears too complex. Three catego- ries of positive, equivocal and negative seem to be more feasible in clinical practice (see above). A complete CSF cytological re- sponse requires a conversion of a previously positive to a negative CSF response maintained for at least 4 weeks. If only lumbar CSF was positive and the patient is treated through a ventricular reser- voir, the CSF response cannot be evaluated unless further lumbar CSF samples are obtained. An unequivocal de novo appearance of malignant cells in the CSF after repeated negative CSF cytologies carried out under optimised conditions should be considered as progression and does not require a confirmatory analysis. In con- trast, a change from negative to equivocal is not considered rele- vant for clinical decision-making. CSF cytology may remain positive in patients with stable or improved clinical or imaging features [138]. The levels of CSF protein, glucose or lactate, or novel biomarkers or new methodologies for the identification of tumour cells in the CSF have not been integrated into routine re- sponse determination at present.
Clinical, imaging and CSF evaluations should be carried out at baseline and at defined time points thereafter to assess the
 
response. Evaluations should be planned every 2 months for the first 6 months and every 3 months thereafter in stable patients, but should be carried out earlier whenever there is suspicion of progression based on clinical assessment.

Recommendations:
•	A detailed neurological examination using a standard evalu- ation form should be carried out every 2–3 months or at radiological progression or when new neurological symptoms or signs are reported [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].
•	Cerebrospinal MRI should be carried out every 2–3 months or at any instance of suspected clinical progression [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].
•	CSF studies should be carried out every 2–3 months in pa- tients undergoing intra-CSF pharmacotherapy [EANO: IV, n/a; ESMO: V, n/a].


 
Although this guideline does not aim at comprehensively describ- ing palliative and supportive care, a few points deserve consider- ation. The role of steroids has not been specifically studied in LM patients, notwithstanding their role for associated brain metastasis,
 

 
 

 







chemical meningitis or other systemic complications of cancer. Steroids may also alleviate meningeal irritation and radicular pain. When required clinically, the lowest dose of steroids should be used for the shortest time possible. Seizures should be managed using drugs that do not interact with systemic treatments. Primary prophylaxis is not recommended [139, 140]. Ventriculoperitoneal shunting may provide durable relief from symptomatic hydro- cephalus [141–144]. National and institutional guidelines may provide further guidance [145].


 
Guidelines reflect knowledge and consensus at a given timepoint. Updates on these recommendations will be announced on the website of EANO (www.eano.eu) and ESMO (www.esmo.org).
Randomised trials based on well-defined diagnostic and inclu- sion criteria, in appropriately selected sub-groups of LM patients,
 
enriched for molecular genetic signatures where feasible, and with adequate criteria of evaluation are required to improve the outcome of LM in a primary cancer-specific manner. Important questions to address include the role of intrathecal pharmaco- therapy and of novel systemic therapies, notably targeted agents and immunotherapy.


 
References were identified through searches of PubMed with the search terms ‘leptomeningeal metastasis’, ‘neoplastic meningitis’, ‘intrathecal’, ‘intra-CSF’, ‘CNS’, ‘brain’, ‘metastasis’, ‘trial’, ‘clin- ical’, ‘radiotherapy’ and ‘chemotherapy’ in various combinations from 1 January 1976 to 30 November 2016, because of the paucity of data on this topic. Articles were also identified through searches of the authors’ own files. Only papers in English were re- viewed. Data available only in Abstract form were only exception- ally included. The final reference list was generated by consensus of the authors and based on originality and relevance to the broad scope of this guideline. Levels of evidence and grades of recom- mendation were applied using the European Federation of Neurological Societies criteria as recommended by EANO (Tables 6 and 7) [146] as well as using an adapted version of the
 
Merck Sharp & Dohme and Roche and honoraria for lectures, consultation or advisory board participation from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Gerson Lehrman Group, CMC Contrast, GlaxoSmithKline, Mundipharma, Roche and AstraZeneca. DB, RH, TB, SP, CW, WW, PW and RR have declared no potential conflicts of interest.

 

















 

Infectious Disease Society of America–United States Public Health Service Grading System as recommended by ESMO (Table 8) [147]. Statements without grading were considered jus- tified standard clinical practice by the experts. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.


 
No external funding has been received for the preparation of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.


 
ELR has received research support from Mundipharma and Amgen. MW has received research grants from Acceleron, Actelion, Bayer, Isarna, MSD, Merck EMD, Novocure, Piqur and Roche and honoraria for lectures or advisory board participation or consulting from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celldex, Immunocellular Therapeutics, Isarna, Magforce, MSD, Merck EMD, Northwest Biotherapeutics, Novocure, Pfizer, Roche, Teva and Tocagen. MVdB has received research support from BBB therapeutics. EdA has received advisory board from Roche; trav- els grant from Roche and GlaxoSmithKline; research grant from Roche. WW has received research support from Pfizer, Apogenix, MSD and Roche and has reported being a member of the speak- er’s bureau of Brystol-Myers Squibb and MSD. MP has received research  support  from  Bo¨hringer-Ingelheim,  GlaxoSmithKline,
 
 
1.	Chamberlain M, Junck L, Brandsma D et al. Leptomeningeal metasta- ses: a RANO proposal for response criteria. Neuro Oncol 2017; 19: 484–492.
2.	Rudnicka H, Niwin´ska A, Murawska M. Breast cancer leptomeningeal metastasis—the role of multimodality treatment. J Neurooncol 2007; 84: 57–62.
3.	Gauthier H, Guilhaume MN, Bidard FC et al. Survival of breast cancer pa- tients with meningeal carcinomatosis. Ann Oncol 2010; 21: 2183–2187.
4.	Lee S, Ahn HK, Park YH et al. Leptomeningeal metastases from breast cancer: intrinsic subtypes may affect unique clinical manifestations. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2011; 129: 809–817.
5.	de Azevedo CR, Cruz MR, Chinen LT et al. Meningeal carcinomatosis in breast cancer: prognostic factors and outcome. J Neurooncol 2011; 104: 565–572.
6.	Lara-Medina F, Crismatt A, Villarreal-Garza C et al. Clinical features and prognostic factors in patients with carcinomatous meningitis sec- ondary to breast cancer. Breast J 2012; 18: 233–241.
7.	Meattini I, Livi L, Saieva C et al. Prognostic factors and clinical features in patients with leptominengeal metastases from breast cancer: a single center experience. J Chemother 2012; 24: 279–284.
8.	Kim HJ, Im SA, Keam B et al. Clinical outcome of central nervous sys- tem metastases from breast cancer: differences in survival depending on systemic treatment. J Neurooncol 2012; 106: 303–313.
9.	Niwin´ska A, Rudnicka H, Murawska M. Breast cancer leptomeningeal metastasis: propensity of breast cancer subtypes for leptomeninges and the analysis of factors influencing survival. Med Oncol 2013; 30: 408.
10.	Yust-Katz S, Garciarena P, Liu D et al. Breast cancer and leptomeningeal dis- ease (LMD): hormone receptor status influences time to development of LMD and survival from LMD diagnosis. J Neurooncol 2013; 114: 229–235.
11.	Le Rhun E, Taillibert S, Zairi F et al. A retrospective case series of 103 consecutive patients with leptomeningeal metastasis and breast cancer. J Neurooncol 2013; 113: 83–92.
12.	Niwin´ska A, Rudnicka H, Murawska M. Breast cancer leptomeningeal metastasis: the results of combined treatment and the comparison of methotrexate and liposomal cytarabine as intra-cerebrospinal fluid chemotherapy. Clin Breast Cancer 2015; 15: 66–72.
13.	Morris PG, Reiner AS, Szenberg OR et al. Leptomeningeal metastasis from non-small cell lung cancer: survival and the impact of whole brain radiotherapy. J Thorac Oncol 2012; 7: 382–385.
14.	Park JH, Kim YJ, Lee JO et al. Clinical outcomes of leptomeningeal me- tastasis in patients with non-small cell lung cancer in the modern chemotherapy era. Lung Cancer 2012; 76: 387–392.
15.	Gwak HS, Joo J, Kim S et al. Analysis of treatment outcomes of intraven- tricular chemotherapy in 105 patients for leptomeningeal carcinomatosis from non-small-cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2013; 8: 599–605.
16.	Lee SJ, Lee JI, Nam DH et al. Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis in non- small-cell lung cancer patients: impact on survival and correlated prog- nostic factors. J Thorac Oncol 2013; 8: 185–191.
17.	Riess JW, Nagpal S, Iv M et al. Prolonged survival of patients with non- small-cell lung cancer with leptomeningeal carcinomatosis in the mod- ern treatment era. Clin Lung Cancer 2014; 15: 202–206.
18.	Kuiper JL, Hendriks LE, van der Wekken AJ et al. Treatment and sur- vival of patients with EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer and leptomeningeal metastasis: a retrospective cohort analysis. Lung Cancer 2015; 89: 255–261.
19.	Harstad L, Hess KR, Groves MD. Prognostic factors and outcomes in patients with leptomeningeal melanomatosis. Neuro Oncol 2008; 10: 1010–1018.
 
20.	Geukes Foppen MH, Brandsma D, Blank CU et al. Targeted treatment and immunotherapy in leptomeningeal metastases from melanoma. Ann Oncol 2016; 27: 1138–1142.
21.	Roelz R, Reinacher P, Jabbarli R et al. Surgical ventricular entry is a key risk factor for leptomeningeal metastasis of high grade gliomas. Sci Rep 2015; 5: 17758.
22.	Ahn JH, Lee SH, Kim S et al. Risk for leptomeningeal seeding after re- section for brain metastases: implication of tumor location with mode of resection. J Neurosurg 2012; 116: 984–993.
23.	Elliott JP, Keles GE, Waite M et al. Ventricular entry during resection of malignant gliomas: effect on intracranial cerebrospinal fluid tumor dis- semination. J Neurosurg 1994; 80: 834–839.
24.	Norris LK, Grossman SA, Olivi A. Neoplastic meningitis following sur- gical resection of isolated cerebellar metastasis: a potentially preventable complication. J Neurooncol 1997; 32: 215–223.
25.	van der Ree TC, Dippel DW, Avezaat CJ et al. Leptomeningeal metasta- sis after surgical resection of brain metastases. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999; 66: 225–227.
26.	Suki D, Hatiboglu MA, Patel AJ et al. Comparative risk of leptomenin- geal dissemination of cancer after surgery or stereotactic radiosurgery for a single supratentorial solid tumor metastasis. Neurosurgery 2009; 64: 664–674; discussion 674–676.
27.	Johnson MD, Avkshtol V, Baschnagel AM et al. Surgical resection of brain metastases and the risk of leptomeningeal recurrence in patients treated with stereotactic radiosurgery. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2016; 94: 537–543.
28.	Abouharb S, Ensor J, Loghin ME et al. Leptomeningeal disease and breast cancer: the importance of tumor subtype. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2014; 146: 477–486.
29.	Liao BC, Lee JH, Lin CC et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor tyro- sine kinase inhibitors for non-small-cell lung cancer patients with lepto- meningeal carcinomatosis. J Thorac Oncol 2015; 10: 1754–1761.
30.	Matsumoto S, Takahashi K, Iwakawa R et al. Frequent EGFR mutations in brain metastases of lung adenocarcinoma. Int J Cancer 2006; 119: 1491–1494.
31.	Iuchi T, Shingyoji M, Itakura M et al. Frequency of brain metastases in non-small-cell lung cancer, and their association with epidermal growth factor receptor mutations. Int J Clin Oncol 2015; 20: 674–679.
32.	Gainor JF, Ou SH, Logan J et al. The central nervous system as a sanctu- ary site in ALK-positive non-small-cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2013; 8: 1570–1573.
33.	Lee DW, Lee KH, Kim JW, Keam B. Molecular targeted therapies for the treatment of leptomeningeal carcinomatosis: current evidence and future directions. Int J Mol Sci 2016; 17: pii E1074.
34.	Shaw AT, Kim DW, Nakagawa K et al. Crizotinib versus chemotherapy in advanced ALK-positive lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 2385–2394.
35.	Clarke JL, Perez HR, Jacks LM et al. Leptomeningeal metastases in the MRI era. Neurology 2010; 74: 1449–1454.
36.	Oechsle K, Lange-Brock V, Kruell A et al. Prognostic factors and treat- ment options in patients with leptomeningeal metastases of different primary tumors: a retrospective analysis. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2010; 136: 1729–1735.
37.	Herrlinger U, Wiendl H, Renninger M et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in leptomeningeal metastasis: diagnostic and prognostic value. Br J Cancer 2004; 91: 219–224.
38.	Clatot F, Philippin-Lauridant G, Ouvrier MJ et al. Clinical improve- ment and survival in breast cancer leptomeningeal metastasis correlate with the cytologic response to intrathecal chemotherapy. J Neurooncol 2009; 95: 421–426.
39.	Hyun JW, Jeong IH, Joung A et al. Leptomeningeal metastasis: clinical experience of 519 cases. Eur J Cancer 2016; 56: 107–114.
40.	Boyle R, Thomas M, Adams JH. Diffuse involvement of the leptomenin- ges by tumour—a clinical and pathological study of 63 cases. Postgrad Med J 1980; 56: 149–158.
41.	Gonzalez-Vitale JC, Garcia-Bunuel R. Meningeal carcinomatosis. Cancer 1976; 37: 2906–2911.
 
42.	Kokkoris CP. Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. How does cancer reach the pia-arachnoid? Cancer 1983; 51: 154–160.
43.	Ku¨sters-Vandevelde HV, Ku¨sters B, van Engen-van Grunsven AC et al. Primary melanocytic tumors of the central nervous system: a review with focus on molecular aspects. Brain Pathol 2015; 25: 209–226.
44.	Kwon J, Chie EK, Kim K et al. Impact of multimodality approach for patients with leptomeningeal metastases from solid tumors. J Korean Med Sci 2014; 29: 1094–1101.
45.	Nayak L, DeAngelis LM, Brandes AA et al. The Neurologic Assessment in Neuro-Oncology (NANO) scale: a tool to assess neurologic function for integration into the Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology (RANO) criteria. Neuro Oncol 2017; 19: 625–635.
46.	Chamberlain M, Soffietti R, Raizer J et al. Leptomeningeal metastasis: a Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology critical review of endpoints and response criteria of published randomized clinical trials. Neuro Oncol 2014; 16: 1176–1185.
47.	Freilich RJ, Krol G, DeAngelis LM. Neuroimaging and cerebrospinal fluid cytology in the diagnosis of leptomeningeal metastasis. Ann Neurol 1995; 38: 51–57.
48.	Singh SK, Agris JM, Leeds NE, Ginsberg LE. Intracranial leptomenin- geal metastases: comparison of depiction at FLAIR and contrast- enhanced MR imaging. Radiology 2000; 217: 50–53.
49.	Straathof CS, de Bruin HG, Dippel DW, Vecht CJ. The diagnostic ac- curacy of magnetic resonance imaging and cerebrospinal fluid cytology in leptomeningeal metastasis. J Neurol 1999; 246: 810–814.
50.	Zeiser R, Burger JA, Bley TA et al. Clinical follow-up indicates differen- tial accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging and immunocytology of the cerebral spinal fluid for the diagnosis of neoplastic meningitis—a single centre experience. Br J Haematol 2004; 124: 762–768.
51.	Singh SK, Leeds NE, Ginsberg LE. MR imaging of leptomeningeal meta- stases: comparison of three sequences. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2002; 23: 817–821.
52.	Mahendru G, Chong V. Meninges in cancer imaging. Cancer Imaging 2009; 9: Spec No A:S14-S21.
53.	Lombardi G, Zustovich F, Farina P et al. Neoplastic meningitis from solid tumors: new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Oncologist 2011; 16: 1175–1188.
54.	Grossman SA, Trump DL, Chen DC et al. Cerebrospinal fluid flow abnormalities in patients with neoplastic meningitis. An evaluation using 111indium-DTPA ventriculography. Am J Med 1982; 73: 641–647.
55.	Glantz MJ, Hall WA, Cole BF et al. Diagnosis, management, and sur- vival of patients with leptomeningeal cancer based on cerebrospinal fluid-flow status. Cancer 1995; 75: 2919–2931.
56.	Glantz MJ, Cole BF, Glantz LK et al. Cerebrospinal fluid cytology in pa- tients with cancer: minimizing false-negative results. Cancer 1998; 82: 733–739.
57.	Rogers LR, Duchesneau PM, Nunez C et al. Comparison of cisternal and lumbar CSF examination in leptomeningeal metastasis. Neurology 1992; 42: 1239–1241.
58.	Dux R, Kindler-Ro¨hrborn A, Annas M et al. A standardized protocol for flow cytometric analysis of cells isolated from cerebrospinal fluid. J Neurol Sci 1994; 121: 74–78.
59.	Pan Z, Yang G, Wang Y et al. Thinprep plus Papanicolaou stain method is more sensitive than cytospin-coupled Wright Giems stain method in cerebrospinal fluid cytology for diagnosis of leptomeningeal metastasis from solid tumors. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0122016.
60.	Quijano S, Lo´pez A, Manuel Sancho J et al. Identification of leptomen- ingeal disease in aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: improved sensitivity of flow cytometry. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 1462–1469.
61.	Patel AS, Allen JE, Dicker DT et al. Identification and enumeration of circulating tumor cells in the cerebrospinal fluid of breast cancer pa- tients with central nervous system metastases. Oncotarget 2011; 2: 752–760.
62.	Le Rhun E, Massin F, Tu Q et al. Development of a new method for identification and quantification in cerebrospinal fluid of malignant cells from breast carcinoma leptomeningeal metastasis. BMC Clin Pathol 2012; 12: 21.
 
63.	Lee JS, Melisko ME, Magbanua MJ et al. Detection of cerebrospinal fluid tumor cells and its clinical relevance in leptomeningeal metastasis of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2015; 154: 339–349.
64.	Milojkovic Kerklaan B, Pluim D, Bol M et al. EpCAM-based flow cytometry in cerebrospinal fluid greatly improves diagnostic accuracy of leptomeningeal metastases from epithelial tumors. Neuro Oncol 2016; 18: 855–862.
65.	Ma C, Lv Y, Jiang R et al. Novel method for the detection and quantifi- cation of malignant cells in the CSF of patients with leptomeningeal me- tastasis of lung cancer. Oncol Lett 2016; 11: 619–623.
66.	Subir´a D, Simo´ M, Ill´an J et al. Diagnostic and prognostic significance of flow cytometry immunophenotyping in patients with leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. Clin Exp Metastasis 2015; 32: 383–391.
67.	Tu Q, Wu X, Le Rhun E et al. CellSearch technology applied to the de- tection and quantification of tumor cells in CSF of patients with lung cancer leptomeningeal metastasis. Lung Cancer 2015; 90: 352–357.
68.	Magbanua MJ, Roy R, Sosa EV et al. Genome-wide copy number ana- lysis of cerebrospinal fluid tumor cells and their corresponding archival primary tumors. Genomics Data 2014; 2: 60–62.
69.	Li Y, Pan W, Connolly ID et al. Tumor DNA in cerebral spinal fluid re- flects clinical course in a patient with melanoma leptomeningeal brain metastases. J Neurooncol 2016; 128: 93–100.
70.	Sasaki S, Yoshioka Y, Ko R et al. Diagnostic significance of cerebro- spinal fluid EGFR mutation analysis for leptomeningeal metastasis in non-small-cell lung cancer patients harboring an active EGFR mutation following gefitinib therapy failure. Respir Investig 2016; 54: 14–19.
71.	Shingyoji M, Kageyama H, Sakaida T et al. Detection of epithelial growth factor receptor mutations in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with lung adenocarcinoma suspected of neoplastic meningitis. J Thorac Oncol 2011; 6: 1215–1220.
72.	Yang H, Cai L, Zhang Y et al. Sensitive detection of EGFR mutations in cerebrospinal fluid from lung adenocarcinoma patients with brain metastases. J Mol Diagn 2014; 16(5): 558–563.
73.	Le Rhun E, Rud´a R, Devos P et al. Diagnosis and treatment patterns for patients with leptomeningeal metastasis from solid tumors across Europe. J Neuro-Oncol 2017 [Epub ahead of print].
74.	Pardridge WM. CSF, blood-brain barrier, and brain drug delivery. Expert Opin Drug Deliv 2016; 13: 963–975.
75.	Boogerd W, van den Bent MJ, Koehler PJ et al. The relevance of intra- ventricular chemotherapy for leptomeningeal metastasis in breast can- cer: a randomised study. Eur J Cancer 2004; 40: 2726–2733.
76.	Glantz MJ, Cole BF, Recht L et al. High-dose intravenous methotrexate for patients with nonleukemic leptomeningeal cancer: is intrathecal chemotherapy necessary? J Clin Oncol 1998; 16: 1561–1567.
77.	Bokstein F, Lossos A, Siegal T. Leptomeningeal metastases from solid tumors: a comparison of two prospective series treated with and without intra-cerebrospinal fluid chemotherapy. Cancer 1998; 82: 1756–1763.
78.	Soffietti R, Abacioglu U, Baumert B et al. Diagnosis and treatment of brain metastases from solid tumors: guidelines from the European Association of Neuro-Oncology (EANO). Neuro Oncol 2017; 19: 162–174.
79.	Church DN, Modgil R, Guglani S et al. Extended survival in women with brain metastases from HER2 overexpressing breast cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 2008; 31: 250–254.
80.	Brufsky AM, Mayer M, Rugo HS et al. Central nervous system metasta- ses in patients with HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer: incidence, treatment, and survival in patients from registHER. Clin Cancer Res 2011; 17: 4834–4843.
81.	Lin NU, Carey LA, Liu MC et al. Phase II trial of lapatinib for brain metastases in patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2- positive breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 1993–1999.
82.	Lin NU, Die´ras V, Paul D et al. Multicenter phase II study of lapatinib in patients with brain metastases from HER2-positive breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2009; 15: 1452–1459.
83.	Toi M, Iwata H, Fujiwara Y et al. Lapatinib monotherapy in patients with relapsed, advanced, or metastatic breast cancer: efficacy, safety, and biomarker results from Japanese patients phase II studies. Br J Cancer 2009; 101: 1676–1682.
 
84.	Bachelot T, Romieu G, Campone M et al. Lapatinib plus capecitabine in patients with previously untreated brain metastases from HER2- positive metastatic breast cancer (LANDSCAPE): a single-group phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 2013; 14: 64–71.
85.	Metro G, Foglietta J, Russillo M et al. Clinical outcome of patients with brain metastases from HER2-positive breast cancer treated with lapati- nib and capecitabine. Ann Oncol 2011; 22: 625–630.
86.	Sutherland S, Ashley S, Miles D et al. Treatment of HER2-positive meta- static breast cancer with lapatinib and capecitabine in the lapatinib ex- panded access programme, including efficacy in brain metastases–the UK experience. Br J Cancer 2010; 102: 995–1002.
87.	Bartsch R, Berghoff AS, Vogl U et al. Activity of T-DM1 in Her2-positive breast cancer brain metastases. Clin Exp Metastasis 2015; 32: 729–737.
88.	Keith KC, Lee Y, Ewend MG et al. Activity of trastuzumab-emtansine (TDM1) in HER2-positive breast cancer brain metastases: a case series. Cancer Treat Commun 2016; 7: 43–46.
89.	Jacot W, Pons E, Frenel JS et al. Efficacy and safety of trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer with brain metastases. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2016; 157: 307–318.
90.	Dudani S, Mazzarello S, Hilton J et al. Optimal management of lepto- meningeal carcinomatosis in breast cancer patients—a systematic re- view. Clin Breast Cancer 2016; 16: 456–470.
91.	Park IH, Kwon Y, Ro JY et al. Concordant HER2 status between meta- static breast cancer cells in CSF and primary breast cancer tissue. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2010; 123: 125–128.
92.	Wu PF, Lin CH, Kuo CH et al. A pilot study of bevacizumab combined with etoposide and cisplatin in breast cancer patients with leptomenin- geal carcinomatosis. BMC Cancer 2015; 15: 299.
93.	Li M, Zhang Q, Fu P et al. Pemetrexed plus platinum as the first- line treatment option for advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a meta- analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS One 2012; 7: e37229.
94.	Zimmermann S, Dziadziuszko R, Peters S. Indications and limitations of chemotherapy and targeted agents in non-small cell lung cancer brain metastases. Cancer Treat Rev 2014; 40: 716–722.
95.	Besse B, Le Moulec S, Mazie`res J et al. Bevacizumab in patients with nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer and asymptomatic, untreated brain metastases (BRAIN): a nonrandomized, phase II study. Clin Cancer Res 2015; 21: 1896–1903.
96.	Barlesi F, Mazieres J, Merlio JP et al. Routine molecular profiling of pa- tients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: results of a 1-year na- tionwide programme of the French Cooperative Thoracic Intergroup (IFCT). Lancet 2016; 387: 1415–1426.
97.	Umemura S, Tsubouchi K, Yoshioka H et al. Clinical outcome in pa- tients with leptomeningeal metastasis from non-small cell lung cancer: Okayama Lung Cancer Study Group. Lung Cancer 2012; 77: 134–139.
98.	Kawamura T, Hata A, Takeshita J et al. High-dose erlotinib for refrac- tory leptomeningeal metastases after failure of standard-dose EGFR- TKIs. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2015; 75: 1261–1266.
99.	Jackman DM, Cioffredi LA, Jacobs L et al. A phase I trial of high dose gefitinib for patients with leptomeningeal metastases from non-small cell lung cancer. Oncotarget 2015; 6: 4527–4536.
100.	Tetsumoto S, Osa A, Kijima T et al. Two cases of leptomeningeal meta- stases from lung adenocarcinoma which progressed during gefitinib therapy but responded to erlotinib. Int J Clin Oncol 2012; 17: 155–159.
101.	Hoffknecht P, Tufman A, Wehler T et al. Efficacy of the irreversible ErbB fam- ily blocker afatinib in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kin- ase inhibitor (TKI)-pretreated non-small-cell lung cancer patients with brain metastases or leptomeningeal disease. J Thorac Oncol 2015; 10: 156–163.
102.	Mok TS, Wu Y-L, Ahn M-J et al. Osimertinib or platinum-pemetrexed in EGFR T790M-positive lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2017; 376: 629–640.
103.	Togashi Y, Masago K, Masuda S et al. Cerebrospinal fluid concentration of gefitinib and erlotinib in patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2012; 70: 399–405.
104.	Yang JCH, Kim DW, Kim SW et al. Osimertinib activity in patients (pts) with leptomeningeal (LM) disease from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): Updated results from BLOOM, a phase I study. J Clin. Oncol 2016; 34, suppl: 9002.
 
105.	Solomon BJ, Cappuzzo F, Felip E et al. Intracranial efficacy of crizotinib ver- sus chemotherapy in patients with advanced ALK-positive non-small-cell lung cancer: results from PROFILE 1014. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 2858–2865.
106.	Zhang I, Zaorsky NG, Palmer JD et al. Targeting brain metastases in ALK- rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: e510–e521.
107.	Brahmer J, Reckamp KL, Baas P et al. Nivolumab versus docetaxel in advanced squamous-cell non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2015; 373: 123–135.
108.	Borghaei H, Paz-Ares L, Horn L et al. Nivolumab versus docetaxel in advanced nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2015; 373: 1627–1639.
109.	Herbst RS, Baas P, Kim DW et al. Pembrolizumab versus docetaxel for previously treated, PD-L1-positive, advanced non-small-cell lung can- cer (KEYNOTE-010): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2016; 387: 1540–1550.
110.	Rittmeyer A, Barlesi F, Rittmeyer A, Barlesi F, Waterkamp D et al. Atezolizumab versus docetaxel in patients with previously treated non- small-cell lung cancer (OAK): a phase 3, open-label, multicentre rando- mised controlled trial. Lancet 2017; 389: 255–265.
111.	Goldberg SB, Gettinger SN, Mahajan A et al. Pembrolizumab for pa- tients with melanoma or non-small-cell lung cancer and untreated brain metastases: early analysis of a non-randomised, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17: 976–983.
112.	Margolin K, Ernstoff MS, Hamid O et al. Ipilimumab in patients with melanoma and brain metastases: an open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: 459–465.
113.	Konstantinou MP, Dutriaux C, Gaudy-Marqueste C et al. Ipilimumab in melanoma patients with brain metastasis: a retro-spective multicentre evaluation of thirty-eight patients. Acta Derm Venereol 2014; 94: 45–49.
114.	Gibney GT, Forsyth PA, Sondak VK. Melanoma in the brain: biology and therapeutic options. Melanoma Res 2012; 22: 177–183.
115.	Dummer R, Goldinger SM, Turtschi CP et al. Vemurafenib in patients with BRAF(V600) mutation-positive melanoma with symptomatic brain metastases: final results of an open-label pilot study. Eur J Cancer 2014; 50: 611–621.
116.	Fennira F, Page`s C, Schneider P et al. Vemurafenib in the French tem- porary authorization for use metastatic melanoma cohort: a single- centre trial. Melanoma Res 2014; 24: 75–82.
117.	Long GV, Trefzer U, Davies MA et al. Dabrafenib in patients with Val600Glu or Val600Lys BRAF-mutant melanoma metastatic to the brain (BREAK-MB): a multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: 1087–1095.
118.	Siegal T. Leptomeningeal metastases: rationale for systemic chemother- apy or what is the role of intra-CSF-chemotherapy? J Neurooncol 1998; 38: 151–157.
119.	Lassman AB, Abrey LE, Shah GD et al. Systemic high-dose intravenous methotrexate for central nervous system metastases. J Neurooncol 2006; 78: 255–260.
120.	Chahal J, Stopeck A, Clarke K et al. Intravenous thiotepa for treatment of breast cancer-related leptomeningeal carcinomatosis: case series. Neurol Sci 2015; 36: 1691–1693.
121.	Benjamin JC, Moss T, Moseley RP et al. Cerebral distribution of immuno- conjugate after treatment for neoplastic meningitis using an intrathecal radiolabeled monoclonal antibody. Neurosurgery 1989; 25: 253–258.
122.	Burch PA, Grossman SA, Reinhard CS. Spinal cord penetration of intra- thecally administered cytarabine and methotrexate: a quantitative auto- radiographic study. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988; 80: 1211–1216.
123.	Blaney SM, Cole DE, Godwin K et al. Intrathecal administration of top- otecan in nonhuman primates. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1995; 36: 121–124.
124.	Glantz MJ, Van Horn A, Fisher R, Chamberlain MC. Route of intracere- brospinal fluid chemotherapy administration and efficacy of therapy in neoplastic meningitis. Cancer 2010; 116: 1947–1952.
125.	Shapiro WR, Schmid M, Glantz M, Miller JJ. A randomized phase III/ IV study to determine benefit and safety of cytarabine liposome injec- tion for treatment of neoplastic meningitis. J Clin Oncol 2006; 24 (18 Suppl): 1528.
 
126.	Zairi F, Le Rhun E, Bertrand N et al. Complications related to the use of an intraventricular access device for the treatment of leptomeningeal metastases from solid tumor: a single centre experience in 112 patients. J Neurooncol 2015; 124: 317–323.
127.	Kennedy BC, Brown LT, Komotar RJ, McKhann GM 2nd. Stereotactic catheter placement for Ommaya reservoirs. J Clin Neurosci 2016; 27: 44–47.
128.	Morgenstern PF, Connors S, Reiner AS, Greenfield JP. Image guidance for placement of Ommaya reservoirs: comparison of fluoroscopy and frameless stereotactic navigation in 145 patients. World Neurosurg 2016; 93: 154–158.
129.	Gwak HS, Joo J, Shin SH et al. Ventriculolumbar perfusion chemother- apy with methotrexate for treating leptomeningeal carcinomatosis: a Phase II Study. Oncologist 2014; 19: 1044–1045.
130.	Grossman SA, Finkelstein DM, Ruckdeschel JC et al. Randomized pro- spective comparison of intraventricular methotrexate and thiotepa in patients with previously untreated neoplastic meningitis. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 1993; 11: 561–569.
131.	Glantz MJ, Jaeckle KA, Chamberlain MC et al. A randomized controlled trial comparing intrathecal sustained-release cytarabine (DepoCyt) to intrathecal methotrexate in patients with neoplastic meningitis from solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res 1999; 5: 3394–3402.
132.	Hitchins RN, Bell DR, Woods RL, Levi JA. A prospective randomized trial of single-agent versus combination chemotherapy in meningeal carcinomatosis. J Clin Oncol 1987; 5: 1655–1662.
133.	Cole BF, Glantz MJ, Jaeckle KA et al. Quality-of-life-adjusted survival comparison of sustained-release cytosine arabinoside versus intrathecal methotrexate for treatment of solid tumor neoplastic meningitis. Cancer 2003; 97: 3053–3060.
134.	Zagouri F, Sergentanis TN, Bartsch R et al. Intrathecal administration of trastuzumab for the treatment of meningeal carcinomatosis in HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer: a systematic review and pooled analysis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2013; 139: 13–22.
135.	Chamberlain MC, Kormanik PA. Prognostic significance of 111indium-DTPA CSF flow studies in leptomeningeal metastases. Neurology 1996; 46: 1674–1677.
136.	Chamberlain MC. Radioisotope CSF flow studies in leptomeningeal metastases. J Neurooncol 1998; 38: 135–140.
137.	Pan Z, Yang G, He H et al. Concurrent radiotherapy and intrathecal methotrexate for treating leptomeningeal metastasis from solid tumors with adverse prognostic factors: a prospective and single-arm study. Int J Cancer 2016; 139: 1864–1872.
138.	Chamberlain MC, Johnston SK. Neoplastic meningitis: survival as a function of cerebrospinal fluid cytology. Cancer 2009; 115: 1941–1946.
139.	Weller M, Stupp R, Wick W. Epilepsy meets cancer: when, why, and what to do about it? Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: e375–e382.
140.	Tremont-Lukats IW, Ratilal BO, Armstrong T, Gilbert MR. Antiepileptic drugs for preventing seizures in people with brain tumors. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008; CD004424.
141.	Jung TY, Chung WK, Oh IJ. The prognostic significance of surgically treated hydrocephalus in leptomeningeal metastases. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2014; 119: 80–83.
142.	Nigim F, Critchlow JF, Kasper EM. Role of ventriculoperitoneal shunt- ing in patients with neoplasms of the central nervous system: an analysis of 59 cases. Mol Clin Oncol 2015; 3: 1381–1386.
143.	Zhang XH, Wang XG, Piao YZ et al. Lumboperitoneal shunt for the treat- ment of leptomeningeal metastasis. Med Hypotheses 2015; 84: 506–508.
144.	Yamashiro S, Hitoshi Y, Tajiri S et al. Palliative lumboperitoneal shunt for leptomeningeal metastasis-related hydrocephalus: a case series. Palliat Med 2017; 31: 93–96.
145.	Pace A, Linda Dirven L, Koekkoek JAF et al., on behalf of the European Association of Neuro-Oncology palliative care task force. EANO guidelines for palliative care in adult glioma patients. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18: e330–e340.
146.	Brainin M, Barnes M, Baron JC et al. Guidance for the preparation of neurological management guidelines by EFNS scientific task forces— revised recommendations 2004. Eur J Neurol 2004; 11: 577–581.
147.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
