




 SPECIAL ARTICLE	

Malignant pleural mesothelioma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up5
S. Popat1,2, P. Baas3,4, C. Faivre-Finn5, N. Girard6, A. G. Nicholson2,7, A. K. Nowak8,9, I. Opitz10, A. Scherpereel11 &
M. Reck12, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Royal Marsden Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Section of Clinical Studies, Institute of Cancer Research, London; 2National Centre for Mesothelioma Research, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK; 3Department of Thoracic Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam; 4Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands; 5Department of Clinical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust and University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; 6Thorax Institute Curie Montsouris, Institut Curie, Paris, France; 7Department of Histopathology, Royal Brompton & Harefield Hospitals, London, UK; 8National Centre for Asbestos Related Diseases, Centre for Respiratory Health, University of Western Australia, Nedlands; 9Medical School, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Australia; 10Department of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 11Department of Pulmonary and Thoracic Oncology, University of Lille, CHU Lille, INSERM U1189, OncoThAI, Lille, France; 12Department of Thoracic Oncology, LungenClinic Airway Research Center North (ARCN), German Center for Lung Research, Grosshansdorf, Germany


Available online 30 November 2021



 

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Incidence
Incidence of malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is generally higher in males than females and is attributed to historical differences in exposures with world-standardised incidence rates per 100 000 persons of 0.7 and 0.3 in the United States and 1.7 and 0.4 for Europe (for males and females, respectively). Incidence is highest in countries with greatest previous asbestos use such as the Netherlands, UK and Australia.1 Due to a lag time of w40 years between exposure and presentation, alongside relatively recent us- age bans, incidence continues to rise in many countries. In Europe, rates of mesothelioma were rising sharply in the early 2000s, although there is longer-term uncertainty on incidence given the high usage of asbestos domestically. Moreover, in the developing world, asbestos use continues to rise.2 Incidence is higher in males than females and several studies have reported better survival for females compared with males.3
Epidemiology
MPM is a relatively rare tumour classified by the World Health Organization (WHO) as directly attributable to all

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: September 2021. This publication supersedes the previously published versiondAnn Oncol. 2015:26 (suppl 5):v31-v39.
0923-7534/© 2021 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 

types of asbestos exposure and is therefore both an in- dustrial and preventable disease. Asbestos use is currently banned in 67 countries4 but continues to be high in Central Asia compared with Europe, with several countries, including the United States, having no ban but only usage restrictions. Mesothelioma is a disease of the elderly, being rare below the age of 50 years, with a sharp rise in inci- dence thereafter and a   median   age   at   diagnosis   of 76 years.5

DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Diagnosis
Patients typically present with one or more of dyspnoea, chest pain and weight loss. Symptoms may occur over many months. During physical examination, unilateral effusions are typical. It is important that a detailed occupational history is obtained for potential legal compensation.
Standard work-up (Table 1) includes:
chest X-ray;
computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and upper abdomen;
thoracentesis, with examination of the pleural effusion (thoracoscopy with confirmatory biopsy is preferred);
●	general laboratory blood tests.
Plain chest radiography lacks sufficient sensitivity and specificity for diagnosis and staging. Significant volumes of pleural effusions can mask pleural/chest lesions and make small, malignant pleural lesions undetectable. When an occupational history indicates significant asbestos exposure, or radiology is suggestive of mesothelioma, cytology can be
 
Annals of Oncology	S. Popat et al.

 

Table 1. Table of diagnostic work-up
Initial presentation	Diagnostic phase
Occupational history	CT scan
Chest X-ray	Pleural ﬂuid sampling (cytology)
General blood tests	Thoracoscopy or CT-/US-guided histological biopsya
CT, computed tomography; US, ultrasound.
a Thoracoscopy with confirmatory biopsy is preferred.

 


used to detect malignant cells (but may yield false nega- tives), and immunohistochemical confirmation should be undertaken (see the Pathology and molecular biology sub- section). Thoracoscopy is recommended to obtain adequate histology, to stage optimally and to allow pleural ﬂuid evacuation (with or without pleurodesis).6,7 This can be carried out by pleuroscopy or by video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). MPM can be difficult to identify and there- fore deep biopsies from ideally three sites are recom- mended. When thoracoscopy is not feasible or contraindicated, CT scan or ultrasound-guided biopsies are a good alternative. Other than obtaining a diagnosis, there are medico-legal reasons to confirm an MPM diagnosis. To date, there are no studies that recommend screening of patients who have had any (occupational) history of asbestos exposure.
Potential circulating tumour markers have been exten- sively tested; however, only a few have been able to facil- itate the diagnostic process: cyfra 21.1, fibulin-3 and mesothelin all lack specificity and should not be used as specific markers for mesothelioma.8 Carcinoembryonic an- tigen (CEA) is a negative marker and is not increased in MPM. It may be useful to rule out MPM when tissue analysis is inconclusive.


Pathology and molecular biology
Classification of mesothelioma has been updated in 2021 by the WHO.9 Nearly all pleural mesotheliomas are diffuse, although very rarely tumours are localised, defined by a single circumscribed mass with no clinical or histological evidence of spread.10 There are three histological subtypes: epithelioid, sarcomatoid and biphasic. There is increased recognition, however, of the importance of architectural patterns and both cytological and stromal features.9,11 In addition, following several independent, retrospective cohort studies, grading of epithelioid mesotheliomas is recommended for epithelioid subtypes.9,11,12
The diversity of histological features in mesotheliomas, combined with the pleura being a common site for meta- static disease and reactive changes showing significant aty- pia, makes diagnosis on morphology alone problematic and use of immunohistochemistry (IHC) is recommended. For epithelioid mesotheliomas, diagnosis can usually be made by using a combination of two ‘mesothelioma-associated’ markers [e.g. calretinin, Wilms’ tumour-1 (WT-1), cytokeratin 5/6] and two ‘(adeno)carcinoma-associated’ markers [e.g.
 
CEA, Ber-EP4, MOC-31], supplemented by other markers dependent on possibility of known, suspected or occult malignancies.13 These other markers are far less specific and sensitive in sarcomatoid malignancies, although broad- spectrum cytokeratins are positive in the majority of sarco- matoid mesotheliomas, while most sarcomas are negative.13 There are also numerous other antibodies that may be of value to a greater or lesser extent, reviewed elsewhere, and pathologists should consider these as appropriate.13 Exclu- sion of mesothelioma by identifying tumour molecular var- iants specific to certain sarcomas [e.g. primary pleural synovial sarcoma and t(x:18) may also be valuable].13 Diffuse and localised mesotheliomas also need to be distinguished from the much rarer well-differentiated papillary mesothe- lial tumour and adenomatoid tumour, both of mesothelial origin but with far more indolent behaviour.9
Samples used for diagnosis of pleural mesothelioma range from pleural effusion cytology, blind or image-guided needle core biopsies, open or VATS surgical biopsies sam- ples to macroscopic complete resection (MCR), extended pleural decortication (EPD) and extrapleural pneumonec- tomy (EPP) samples. Opinions differ on the accuracy of cytological diagnosis and most will require a minimum of IHC on cell blocks to confirm mesothelial phenotype.13,14 In most cases, tissue biopsies that allow identification of subpleural invasion and its extent are required. Thor- acocentesis for the sole purpose of cytological diagnosis should be avoided as biopsy is more likely to provide a definitive diagnosis, to minimise the risk of permeation metastasis along thoracocentesis tracts. Definitive diagnosis can be made on single samples of any size but an expert consensus document recently proposed that sampling of at least three sites, if feasible, should be undertaken to in- crease the likelihood of robust subtyping and grading, with subsequent supporting evidence in a retrospective cohort.11,15 Expert consensus also proposed that imaging might be useful in targeting biopsies to specific areas of interest.11
In relation to the differential diagnoses of the epithelioid subtype versus mesothelial hyperplasia and sarcomatoid subtype versus reactive fibrous pleuritis, recent studies have identified that mesotheliomas often show loss of BAP1 (more common in epithelioid subtype) and/or loss of CDKN2A (more common in sarcomatoid subtype). Loss of BAP1 can be identified through IHC. Loss of CDKN2A requires molecular analysis, although loss of methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) staining can act as a surrogate (with 96% specificity but 78% sensitivity16), as MTAP is located very close to CDKN2A at 9p21.3. It is recommended, how- ever, that any laboratories using these antibodies or mo- lecular assays have validated testing protocols.9 Molecular testing should not be used in isolation of other findings as the field is far from fully understood. For example, the sig- nificance of focal loss of MTAP remains uncertain.
The 2021 WHO classification also recognises mesotheli- oma in situ (MIS).9,17 Until recently, such a diagnosis was not possible  due to the morphological overlap  between
 
S. Popat et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
reactive and neoplastic atypia in mesothelial cells, although advances in molecular pathology have allowed MIS to be diagnosed through a combination of clinical, imaging and morphological data, together with loss of BAP1 staining and/or loss of MTAP staining and/or homozygous deletion of CDKN2A.9 The 2021 WHO classification also recommends grading of epithelioid mesotheliomas into a two-tier system of high and low grade, applicable to resections and biopsies.
Recommendations
Diagnostic procedures
Diagnostic procedures should encompass at least occu- pational history with emphasis on asbestos exposure [II, A] and contrast-enhanced CT of the thorax and upper abdomen [II, A].
In all patients who have a unilateral pleural thickening, with or without ﬂuid and/or pleural plaques, efforts should be made to obtain a pathological specimen [II, A]. Thoracoscopy is preferred [III, B].
The role of screening of persons exposed to asbestos for early MPM diagnosis is uncertain [IV, E].
Circulating tumour markers cannot adequately distin- guish MPM [II, D].
Pathological sampling
Effusion cytology for MPM definitive diagnosis remains controversial and biopsy is recommended especially for histological subtyping and if clinical trial participation is considered [IV, B].
Biopsy sampling of at least three distant sites when feasible, with possible targeting of areas of interest via thoracoscopic imaging, is recommended for robust sub- typing and grading [IV, B].
Pathological classiﬁcation
Mesotheliomas should be classified using the current WHO criteria, including major subtype and documenta- tion of architectural patterns, grading of epithelioid sub- types and stromal and cytologic features that refine prognostication [IV, A].
Epithelioid mesotheliomas should be graded as low or high grade [IV, B], with this stratification used in ongoing and future trials and research [V, C].
A diagnosis of MIS can be made in a multidisciplinary (clinical, imaging, morphological and molecular) setting, with molecular tests undertaken in validated laboratories [IV, A].
Use of IHC
IHC is recommended for all primary diagnoses of MPM [IV, A].
For epithelioid subtype, at least two ‘mesothelial’ markers and at least two ‘(adeno)carcinoma’ markers should be used [V, A].
For sarcomatoid subtype, cytokeratin staining should be used [V, A].
Loss of BAP1 and/or MTAP as surrogate for CDKN2A deletion aid the MPM diagnosis and are required as part of the multidisciplinary diagnosis of MIS, under- taken in a strictly validated setting [IV, A].
 
STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
The current 8th revision of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) TNM (tumourenodeemetastasis) staging system for mesothelioma is based on the updated International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) mesothelioma staging project, using prospective data on >3500 patients treated both surgically and non-surgically, and is presented in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc. 2021.11.005.18 Contrast-enhanced CT of the thorax and up- per abdomen is the recommended baseline imaging for
diagnosis and staging for all patients. Clinical staging for MPM is challenging because of the nature of the disease and growth pattern; additional staging investigations may be required for surgical candidates. Currently different im- aging protocols are being explored for better T staging, specifically for lung parenchyma, diaphragm and chest wall infiltrationdcritical points if considering resection. An important change with regard to N-staging is that no dif- ference in survival between clinical stages N0, N1 and N2 was identified,19 and contralateral nodes are now classified as N2. For surgical candidates, consideration of mediastinal staging by endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) or media- stinoscopy should be given to exclude contralateral involvement. Mediastinoscopy is recommended in case of potential resectable disease and if EBUS is negative despite ﬂuorodeoxyglucose-avid lymph nodes or very small lymph nodes with a low chance of diagnostic yield by EBUS. For M- stage, although rarely metastatic at diagnosis, in surgical candidates it is important to exclude metastases by, for example, positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, due to survival differences between single- versus multiple-site cM1 cases.20 Interpretation of PET-CT may be limited if previous chemical pleurodesis was carried out, but remains useful to exclude occult distant metastatic disease, and because of prognostic utility of maximum standard uptake values.21 MRI may be useful for specific surgical ques- tions.22 Brain imaging is not routine but should be consid- ered in case of clinical suspicion, although central nervous system involvement in early-stage disease is very rare.

Pathological staging
For T stage, because of a well-documented survival differ- ence between pT3 and pT4 tumours,23 clear marking of the surgical specimen is critical for accurate pathological stag- ing, as is the resection of previous biopsy or incision sites,24 which have prognostic importance, as does the resected tumour weight.25 For N-stage, hilar and mediastinal nodes are now classified as N1 and contralateral or all extra- thoracic nodal metastases are categorised as N2.19 The significance of lymph node metastases at other locations such as the mammary vessels, intercostal or peri- diaphragmatic lymph nodes remains unknown.
Staging investigations
Pretreatment staging investigations are important for pa- tient allocation to active treatment or supportive care. The
 
Annals of Oncology	S. Popat et al.

 
patient’s age, performance status (PS) and physiological functioning should be evaluated before extensive staging to consider if active therapy [systemic therapy, radiotherapy (RT) or surgery] will be tolerated. More extensive staging is recommended for those considered suitable for surgical resection with multimodality therapy.26 A summary of staging recommendations proportionate to planned treat- ments is presented in Figure 1.

Recommendations
Staging
The 8th revision of the UICC TNM staging system should be used for clinical and pathological staging [I, A].
Non-invasive staging for a patient fit to undergo active treatment should include contrast-enhanced CT of the chest including the upper abdomen [III, B].
For patients considered for MCR, additional staging including PET-CT should be carried out [III, B].
Pathological staging
Pathological staging should be limited to MCR specimens with smaller specimens being clinically staged [V, B].


MANAGEMENT OF MPM
Treatment of mesothelioma
The treatment strategy (Figures 2-4) should take into ac- count factors such as staging, histology, age, PS, comor- bidities and the patient’s preferences. Treatment decisions should ideally be discussed within a multidisciplinary tumour board who are experienced in mesothelioma management.
 
Role of surgery
Surgery for staging and palliation. Surgery plays a role in mesothelioma diagnosis, treatment and palliation. For diagnosis and treatment allocation, an accurate diagnostic procedure is crucial. For this purpose, sufficient numbers of large and deep pleural biopsies (either by VATS or mini- thoracotomy) should be obtained to prove microscopic subpleural fat tissue invasion and to allow for adequate immunohistochemical analysis. Uniportal approach for VATS has the advantage of reducing the risk of port-site recur- rence. Surgical procedures for palliation such as effusion control should be primarily minimally invasive whenever possible, to minimise morbidity. A randomised controlled trial (MesoVATS)27 comparing VATS partial pleurectomy with talc pleurodesis with the primary outcome of overall survival (OS) at 1 year showed no differences between groups. Therefore currently talc poudrage via thoracoscopy remains the first procedure of choice for pleurodesis. VATS partial pleurectomy is a valid therapy option for patients fit enough for surgery with non-expanded lungs and who therefore would not benefit from chemical pleurodesis. Indwelling pleural catheters (IPCs), which can be inserted in an outpatient setting and are convenient for patients to handle independently, are a very good   alternative for rapid palliation of recurring pleural effusions, even with an entrapped lung.28 Whether VATS-pleurectomy/ decortication is more effective than IPCs for patients with entrapped lungs is currently being investigated in a multi- centre randomised feasibility phase III trial (MesoTRAP).29
Cytoreductive surgery with radical intent. MCR, defined as a procedure to remove all visible and palpable tumours
 


 
Figure 1. A staging summary for MPM.
Red: surgery; white: other aspects of management.
CT, computed tomography; EBUS, endobronchial ultrasound; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; FDG, ﬂuorodeoxyglucose; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, positron emission tomography; VATS, video-assisted thoracic surgery.
Modified from Opitz et al.26 with permission.
 
S. Popat et al.	Annals of Oncology



Confirmed mesothelioma diagnosis






 

Suitable for best supportive care only
 
Suitable for active treatment but not multimodality treatment (e.g. inoperable or comorbidities)
 

Suitable for multimodality treatment including surgery
 

Figure 2. Therapeutic strategy by treatment intent.
Purple: general categories or stratification; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments; white: other aspects of management.


 
within the hemithorax, may be suitable for selected pa- tients in selected centres with such experience, as part of multimodality treatment. MCR can be achieved by EPP consisting of en bloc resection of lung, pleura, pericardium and diaphragm or EPD, where visceral and parietal pleura

Figure 3. Treatment algorithm for multimodality management of MPM. Purple: general categories or stratification; red: surgery; blue: systemic anti- cancer therapy; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments.
ChT, chemotherapy; MPM, malignant pleural mesothelioma; VATS, video- assisted thoracic surgery.
a Extended pleurectomy/decortication is the favoured approach.
b Current data support multimodality systemic therapy with platinume pemetrexed.
 
are removed together with pericardium and diaphragm. Both techniques include systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection for optimal staging. Although EPP was traditionally the technique of choice, in a systematic re- view of 1145 patients comparing outcomes after EPD with EPP, perioperative mortality (2.9% versus 6.8%, P      0.02)
and morbidity (27.9% versus 62.0%, P < 0.001) were significantly lower with EPD than EPP, whereas OS was
comparable.30 These results were further confirmed in a meta-analysis of 2903 patients treated with EPD or EPP.31 Therefore, lung-sparing EPD should be considered as the first-choice surgical procedure, whereas EPP may be offered in highly selected patients when carried out in high-volume centres.
The role of surgery over non-surgical therapy has been addressed in only one randomised controlled trial: the Mesothelioma and Radical Surgery (MARS) trial, a small trial that identified poorer survival for EPP.32 This UK trial was not powered to assess OS and was designed to evaluate feasibility of randomisation for EPP over non-surgical ther- apy. Nevertheless, the adjusted hazard ratio (HR) for OS between EPP and no-EPP groups was 2.75 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.21-6.26]; however, the 12-month survival rate was not significantly different. Currently, a multicentre, randomised trial comparing EPD with no surgery (MARS-2) is ongoing (NCT02040272). By contrast, a variety of retro- spective and prospective cohort studies and population and cancer registries suggest a survival advantage for patients undergoing surgery,33,34 although selection bias obviously plays an important role. Factors suggestive for surgery not being beneficial include sarcomatoid histology, contralateral mediastinal or supraclavicular lymph node involvement, extrathoracic disease, multilevel chest wall infiltration or inadequate cardiopulmonary reserve. Currently, no single prognostic factor, but rather prognostic scores, may be considered for patient treatment allocation.
The combination and sequence of modalities used within multimodality treatments in combination with surgery are not standardised. Platinumepemetrexed chemotherapy
 
Annals of Oncology	S. Popat et al.

Figure 4. Treatment algorithm for patients unsuitable for multimodality management (inoperable) of MPM.
Purple: general categories or stratification; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white: other aspects of management.
EMA, European Medicines Agency; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale; MPM, malignant pleural mesothelioma; PS, performance status.
a ESMO-MCBS v1.192 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/scale-evaluation-forms-v1.0-v1.1/scale-evaluation- forms-v1.1).
b For patients not previously exposed to ICI therapy.

 
(ChT) is usually given in either neoadjuvant and/or adjuvant paradigms to surgery, and the question of timing is currently being explored (NCT02436733). The role of adju- vant or neoadjuvant immunotherapy is unknown. The po- tential role of high-dose perioperative RT is discussed below.
First-line systemic therapy
Patients not suitable for MCR, as defined in a multidisci- plinary tumour board, are candidates for a non-surgical approach with first-line systemic therapy. Systemic therapy should be considered for all MPM patients with PS 0-2. Two randomised phase III trials of all MPM histological subtypes demonstrated an improved OS for pemetrexed35 (68% epithelioid; 24% non-epithelioid) or raltitrexed36 (61%-75% epithelioid; 18%-31% non-epithelioid) with cisplatin compared with cisplatin monotherapy. For cisplatine pemetrexed, folic acid and vitamin B12 supplementation were essential to reduce the pemetrexed toxicities. Despite
 
limited literature, consensus suggests that administration of first-line ChT should not be delayed after diagnosis and should be considered before functional clinical deterioration as pemetrexed-based ChT can improve dyspnoea and quality of life (QoL).37 ChT should be continued for up to six cycles in non-progressing patients, without unacceptable toxicity. Based on several large phase II trials, the CheckMate 743 trial and the MPM pemetrexed International Expanded Ac- cess Program showed comparable efficacy of first-line cisplatinepemetrexed and carboplatinepemetrexed; this latter combination is a reasonable alternative.38,39

Targeted therapies in combination with ﬁrst-line ChT. The phase III MAPS trial demonstrated a significant OS benefit for the addition of bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) to cisplatine pemetrexed as first-line treatment (HR 0.77, 95% CI 0.62-0.95, P   0.0167; median OS 16.1 versus 18.8 months) in MPM (81% epithelioid; 19% non-epithelioid), with only mild and manageable increased toxicities and no negative
 
S. Popat et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
impact on QoL.40,41 This study therefore represents another standard of care for unresectable MPM patients having platinum-based ChT; however, to date, bevacizumab has not been submitted for regulatory approval. Despite multiple studies, no other antiangiogenic drugs or tyrosine kinase inhibitors have demonstrated a significant OS gain in phase III trials,42 with trials of other targets ongoing.

Immunotherapy, alone or combined with other systemic therapy, as ﬁrst-line treatment for MPM. Immune check- point inhibitors (ICIs) and other immunotherapies were first tested as salvage treatment in relapsed MPM with encouraging results (see Systemic therapy for second line and beyond section). In parallel, ICIs are also being evalu- ated in the first-line setting. The phase III CheckMate 743 trial randomised 605 unresectable, treatment-naïve, PS 0-1 MPM patients (75%-76% epithelioid; 24%-25% non- epithelioid) to combination nivolumab (3 mg/kg once every 2 weeks) plus low-dose ipilimumab (1 mg/kg once every 6 weeks) for up to 2 years (or until progression or unacceptable toxicity) versus cisplatinepemetrexed or carboplatinepemetrexed combination for up to six cycles.39 OS was significantly increased with nivolumabeipilimumab over ChT (HR 0.74, 95% CI 0.61-0.89, P      0.002). Impor-
tantly, at 3 years of follow-up, 23% of patients treated by immunotherapy were alive versus only 15% with ChT. This OS gain was observed in the trial as a whole. In an exploratory analysis, immunotherapy demonstrated similar efficacy across both epithelioid and non-epithelioid histol- ogies, but there was differential ChT efficacy by histology, translating to a larger immunotherapy OS benefit in non- epithelioid subtypes than epithelioid subtypes (HR 0.46, 95% CI 0.31-0.68 and HR 0.86, 95% CI 0.69-1.08, respec-
tively). No significant improvement in progression-free survival (PFS) was observed between the ICI and ChT arms (6.8 versus 7.2 months median, respectively; HR 1.00, 95% CI 0.82-1.21) or for objective response rates (ORRs; 39.6% versus 42.7%, respectively), with PFS initially inferior over the first 7 months. At 3 years of follow-up, however, 14% of patients treated by immunotherapy were alive and progression free versus 1% with ChT.43 There were no un- expected toxicities with ICIs and rates of grade 3-4 treatment-related adverse events were reported to be similar between both arms. Any grade treatment-related adverse events led to discontinuation in 23.0% and 15.8% of patients, respectively. Thus the balance of efficacy against toxicities was more favourable in non-epithelioid MPM patients than in epithelioid cases. Interestingly, patient- reported outcomes data from this trial seemed to favour the immunotherapy arm in terms of QoL and of symptoms deterioration.44 Taken together, these data suggest that nivolumabeipilimumab is a new first-line option for unre- sectable MPM, more so for non-epithelioid disease, and is now approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA), without his- tology or biomarker subtype restriction.
Several other experimental immunotherapy combina-
tions are being explored in phase III trials, including the
 
PrE0506/DREAM3R trial (NCT04334759) evaluating cisplatinepemetrexededurvalumab with maintenance dur- valumab versus cisplatinepemetrexed, the ETOP 13-18/ BEAT-meso trial (NCT03762018) comparing carboplatine pemetrexedebevacizumab followed by bevacizumab maintenance with carboplatinepemetrexedebevacizumabe atezolizumab followed by atezolizumabebevacizumab main- tenance, the CCTG IND227/IFCT-1901 trial (NCT02 784171) comparing cisplatinepemetrexed and carboplatine pemetrexed with or without pembrolizumab for six cycles, followed by pembrolizumab maintenance. Other immuno- therapy strategies have also been tested but with discordant or negative results.45 Dendritic cell vaccination was found to be promising in small trials, providing rationale for the randomised phase II-III trial DENIM (NCT03610360). In conclusion, nivolumabeipilimumab represents a new standard-of-care option for inoperable first-line MPM pa- tients alongside cisplatinepemetrexed or carboplatine pemetrexed and platinumepemetrexedebevacizumab. More studies are needed to firmly establish immunotherapy for all settings of MPM patients, however, either alone or in combination with standard treatment or targeted therapies, and to validate predictive biomarkers for patient selection.

Maintenance systemic therapy
There are no strong data in the literature suggesting a benefit for maintenance treatment after standard first-line ChT by platinumepemetrexed. A recent randomised phase II trial, which closed prematurely due to poor recruitment, assessed pemetrexed continuation maintenance versus observation after four to six cycles of first-line platinume pemetrexed. No improvement in PFS or OS was observed.46 A randomised phase II trial (NVALT19; NTR4132) tested a switch to maintenance gemcitabine versus best supportive care (BSC) after four to six cycles of platinumepemetrexed. PFS was significantly longer with gemcitabine, but there was no OS benefit.47 Switch to maintenance defactinib [a focal adhesion kinase (FAK) inhibitor] versus placebo was also evaluated after first-line therapy,48 but no OS benefit was observed regardless of biomarker (merlin) expression. While the addition of bevacizumab to first-line cisplatine pemetrexed ChT is now considered a standard as dis- cussed above, this trial was not designed to assess the contribution of bevacizumab maintenance.

Systemic therapy for second line and beyond
There is a limited evidence base for active post-ChT second- line cytotoxic ChTs, evidenced by the VIM and PROMISE- meso trials, randomising against symptom control and pembrolizumab, respectively.49,50 Most other efforts in the second-line setting have focussed on signal-seeking trials, rather than large, randomised trials to definitively demon- strate benefits of second- or subsequent-line treatment.
Role of ICIs. A number of trials of ICIs have been conducted in second- or subsequent-line settings. These used CTLA-4, PD-1 and PD-L1  targeting agents. The DETERMINE study
 

Volume 33 ■ Issue 2 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.005	135
 
Annals of Oncology	S. Popat et al.

 
compared tremelimumab with placebo, and showed no OS benefit.51 Subsequently, clinical trials of single-agent pro- grammed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) inhibition have shown modest ac- tivity, with ORRs ranging from 10% to 29% and highly var- iable PFS and OS.52-56 The MAPS2 phase II trial randomised 125 second- and third-line MPM patients to nivolumab or nivolumab plus ipilimumab. Both arms reached their pri- mary endpoint of a centrally reviewed response rate of over 40%, with an encouraging OS of 11.9 and 15.9 months, respectively.57 The PROMISE-meso randomised phase III clinical trial compared pembrolizumab with second-line vinorelbine or gemcitabine monotherapy, and demon- strated no OS benefit for pembrolizumab despite a higher response rate; notably, 63% of patients on ChT crossed over to receive pembrolizumab.50 Discrepancies between PROMISE-meso and MAPS2 trials, beyond different designs, could also be the consequence of different patient selec- tion, as more MAPS2 patients may have had relatively indolent disease, not immediately progressing after first line. Indeed, in that trial a stratification factor was time of
progression/relapse after first-line completion (>/<3 months), and rapidly progressive MAPS2 patients had the
shortest OS, comparable with the OS of the pembrolizumab arm patients from the PROMISE-meso trial. Results of the CONFIRM study, a randomised phase III trial comparing nivolumab with placebo in the second- or third-line setting, demonstrated a significant OS (HR 0.72, 95% CI 0.55-0.94, P   0.02) and PFS benefit, with greater benefit in epithe- lioid subtypes and no predictive utility of PD-L1 expression,58 but the recent OS benefit for first-line nivolumabeipilimumab will reduce the relevance of re- sults of ICI therapy in ICI-pretreated patients.
Role of other systemic therapies. There is some evidence for retreatment with platinumepemetrexed doublet. A recent meta-analysis suggested that reintroduction of platinume pemetrexed or pemetrexed alone was among the most active options in the second-line setting.59 Vinorelbine or gemcitabine monotherapy are used in practice and, while they demonstrate modest ORRs, there is no evidence of improved survival for vinorelbine over placebo/BSC from the randomised VIM trial49 or for vinorelbine or gemcitabine over single-agent pembrolizumab from the randomised PROMISE- meso trial.50 In a small randomised phase II trial (RAMES), combination gemcitabineeramucirumab demonstrated an encouraging OS benefit over gemcitabineeplacebo.60

Role of systemic therapy beyond second line
The CONFIRM study is the only clinical trial that provided randomised evidence in the third-line setting, versus pla- cebo, in ICI-naïve patients. At the moment, use of treat- ment beyond the second line remains speculative.

Personalised therapy
Predictors for standard-of-care therapies. A variety of biomarkers have been evaluated to predict benefit from
 
bevacizumab40 or nintedanib,42 none with proven predic- tive utility.
PD-L1 is expressed in 40%-60% of MPM tumour cells, strongly in sarcomatoid cases.61 This association may explain the reported worse outcomes in PD-L1-positive MPM.61 In several studies, PD-L1 expression was loosely correlated with response to ICIs, alone or in combination with CTLA-4 inhibitors,51,53,54,56,57,62,63 including explor- atory analysis of CheckMate 743 where OS with ICIs was improved over ChT in PD-L1-positive MPM ( 1% of tumour cells, HR 0.69, 95% CI 0.55-0.87) but not in PD-L1- negative cases (HR 0.94, 95% CI 0.62-1.40),39 although the optimal testing method and cut-off remain unknown. Tumour mutational burden is low in MPM64 and micro- satellite instability is rare with only 1 of 74 cases in The Cancer Genome Atlas being hypermutated.64
Genomic alterations for precision medicine. In MPM, activating mutations are rare and genomic losses/alter- ations are more widespread. Mutations occur most frequently in BAP1 (25%-60% of cases), CDKN2A/B (40%-45% of cases) and NF2 genes (20%-50% of cases)64; these mutations are observed across all MPM histologies with some variability in frequency. Somatic BAP1 losses/ inactivating mutations occur in up to 60% of MPMs and support a classical two-hit tumour suppressor mechanism. Somatic BAP1 mutations may have germline counterparts that define the BAP1 hereditary cancer syndrome65; these
mutations are observed in <5% of MPM patients. In pa- tients with a family history of mesothelioma or cancers
consistent with the BAP1 hereditary cancer syndrome, referral to a clinical genetics service is recommended for germline BAP1 mutation screening. NF2 mutations were reported preclinically to predict the efficacy of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibition, but clinical data have been disappointing to date. NF2 mutations may lead, through altered merlin function, to FAK inhibitor-induced synthetic lethality, and experimental approaches are ongoing, including the potential for YAP/TEAD inhibitors for tumours with dysregulation of the Hippo pathway. CDKN2A/ B regulates the Rb and MDM2-TP53 tumour suppressor pathways; CDKN2A mutations may predict the efficacy of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) inhibitors with trials ongoing. Preclinical evidence and some series suggest that sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents may be BAP1- driven and this has been observed also in MPM pa- tients.66,67 BAP1 loss has been evaluated as a possible biomarker of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor efficacy. In a phase II trial of rucaparib in BAP1- or BRCA1- deficient patients (MiST1) rucaparib met the primary endpoint of disease control at 12 weeks (58%).68 Other alterations that may be potentially actionable in MPM include PTCH1 mutations (5% of cases) and loss of argini- nosuccinate synthetase, among others. Clinical trials are ongoing, but the absence of selection of patients based on genotyping may hamper the identification of any signal of clinical efficacy; the Mesothelioma Stratified Therapy trial (NCT03654833) is investigating such selection of patients
 

136	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.005	Volume 33 ■ Issue 2 ■ 2022
 
S. Popat et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
based on molecular characterisation. Mesothelin-directed agents have been, and continue to be, under intensive investigation in MPM.

Role of RT
RT can be used for different indications in mesothelioma: as palliation, as prophylaxis and as part of a multimodality treatment.
Palliative RT for symptom control. For patients with pain (e.g. chest wall invasion or other thoracic structures), RT can be considered, although limited high-quality evidence currently exists to support RT for pain control.69 Palliative RT is typically given in short courses of 1-10 fractions. A prospective, multicentre, single-arm study investigated 20 Gy in five fractions to painful areas and demonstrated that RT is effective in controlling pain 5 weeks after treatment completion.70 A follow-on study is ongoing comparing this regime with a higher RT dose using advanced techniques (ISRCTN126981070). No prospective studies have specif- ically investigated the role of RT for palliation of cough or breathlessness.
Prophylactic RT of instrumentation tracts. For decades, the role of prophylactic irradiation of tracts after diagnostic or therapeutic pleural procedures to reduce the risk of sub- cutaneous metastasis was heavily debated. Three small randomised, controlled trials carried out in the pre-ChT era reported contradictory results. However, since the publica- tion of the previous version of this ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) in 2015, two large, randomised, multicentre studies were published, neither of them demonstrating a benefit to prophylactic tract irradiation. In both studies, the majority of patients received ChT. The first study (SMART trial) compared immediate RT (21 Gy in three fractions within 42 days of large-bore pleural interventions) with deferred RT.71 No significant difference between the two arms in terms of tract metastases rate, chest pain, analgesia requirements, QoL and OS was demonstrated. A suggestion of benefit, however, was identified in subgroups (i.e. epithelioid histology) and those untreated with ChT (pre- defined analysis), and in those with RT protocol deviations. Nevertheless, the applicability of these results is limited by small numbers in each subgroup. The second study [Pro- phylactic Irradiation of Tracts (PIT)] compared prophylactic RT of tracts (21 Gy in three fractions within 42 days of pleural intervention) with no RT.72 No significant difference in incidence of chest wall metastases at 6 and 12 months was reported between the two groups, including when controlling for stratification factors (epithelioid histology versus others and ChT intention), although the cumulative incidence was higher at later timepoints in both trials (e.g. month 24 in PIT). Skin toxicity from RT was mild. Further- more, contrary to a commonly held belief, PIT demon- strated that more than half of the patients who developed chest wall metastases did not report increased pain scores. Despite some differences in participants recruited, RT techniques and endpoints between the SMART and PIT
 
trials, both studies conducted in the ChT era came to the same conclusion: that prophylactic irradiation of tracts is not justified in routine practice, although some have com- mented on statistical design and potential late benefit of postoperative RT.73

High-dose RT
Preoperative and postoperative RT. The delivery of perioperative RT is challenging due to complex volumes of irradiation related to the growth patterns of the disease in the diaphragmal gutters and in the lobar fissures. Field sizes and dose delivered to neighbouring organs at risk (OARs) contribute considerably to toxicity. Radiation-induced lung toxicity is especially high when the lung remains in situ after decortication but improved three-dimensional RT planning and the introduction of intensity-modulated RT (IMRT) have led to improved conformality of the high-dose radiation volumes and decreased toxicity. Strict dosimetric con- straints should be implemented for target volumes and critical organs (contralateral lung, cardiac volume, spinal cord, oesophagus, liver, right and left kidney). Studies have underlined the importance of RT techniques, in terms of both local control and toxicity. It is therefore recommended that such RT be delivered in specialised centres.
Studies evaluating perioperative RT either before or after surgery (EPP or EPD) have shown that RT is feasible in the multimodality setting. Severe toxicities have been reported, however, particularly radiation pneumonitis in up to 46% of patients.74 In patients who develop 3 grade radiation pneumonitis, a normal lung dose-volume effect was established,75,76 and strict dose constraints applied to the contralateral lung have resulted in reduction in severe pneumonitis.
Most of the studies evaluating RT in the multimodality setting were carried out in the context of EPP, which is no longer a standard surgical procedure. Since the last ESMO CPG, a randomised controlled trial in the postoperative setting was published. The SAKK trial randomised 54 pa- tients after EPP to either observation or adjuvant hemi- thoracic RT (three-dimensional conformal RT or IMRT; median dose 55.9 Gy).77 The trial closed early due to poor accrual and was therefore underpowered. The primary endpoint was locoregional relapse-free survival with no significant difference observed between the two arms (9.4 months versus 7.6 months). Two prospective studies demonstrated that hemithoracic pleural IMRT for MPM is feasible, and has an acceptable toxicity profile after EPD with median survival up to 26 months.78,79 An important finding is that heart dose correlates with symptomatic ra- diation pneumonitis; therefore, the dose to both lung and heart must be taken into consideration to reduce lung toxicity80 and randomised trials are required to establish the role of hemithoracic IMRT after routine EPD. Preop- eratively, the delivery of a short, accelerated course of high-dose IMRT (25 Gy in five fractions to the entire hemithorax with concomitant 5 Gy boost to areas at risk) followed by EPP within a week is possible. In a single-
 
Annals of Oncology	S. Popat et al.

 
centre phase II study of 96 patients median OS was 24.4 months but 49% developed grade 3-4 complications within 30 days of EPP, significantly exceeding the 35% threshold set for feasibility (P      0.0018).81 One patient died of grade 5 pneumonia. Further confirmatory multicentre studies are needed.
There are limited data on the role of stereotactic ablative body RT in patients with oligorecurrent MPM after multi- modality treatment.82
Proton therapy. Proton therapy is an attractive alternative to standard photon RT due to its physical properties. It results in improved sparing of normal tissues (including contralateral lung, heart, stomach and kidneys and liver) when irradiating the pleura, compared with standard pho- tons.83 Several challenges, however, should be considered when treating with protons, including range uncertainty, treating moving targets with significant tissue heteroge- neity and requirements for adaptive treatment due to changes in anatomy during treatment course. Furthermore, to date, prospective studies on proton treatment in this setting are limited to mostly small and single-centre studies.84,85 Data are particularly needed on the impact of proton therapy on a patient’s QoL given its promise to reduce toxicity to OARs.

Recommendations
Role of surgery
Surgery is recommended to obtain diagnostic samples of tumour tissue and to stage the patient [II, A], for pallia- tion of pleural effusions when chest tube drainage is not successful [II, A] and to obtain diagnostic samples of tumour tissue and to stage the patient [II, A].
Talc poudrage via thoracoscopy remains the first surgical procedure of choice for pleurodesis over VATS partial pleurectomy [I, A].
MCR in combination with other modalities is recommen- ded in selected MPM patients, to be carried out at expe- rienced centres and to be discussed with a multidisciplinary team involving thoracic surgeons, pul- monologists, medical and radiation oncologists [III, C].
EPD is a lung-preserving procedure and is preferred over EPP [III, B].
First-line systemic therapy
Pemetrexed combined with cisplatin [I, A; ESMO- Magnitude of Clinical Benefit (ESMO-MCBS) v1.1 score: 3] (or alternatively carboplatin), and vitamin supplemen- tation, up to six cycles is recommended as a first-line systemic therapy option [I, A].
Combination of bevacizumab with platinume pemetrexed is recommended as first-line systemic ther- apy option [I, A].
Nivolumab plus ipilimumab, given up to 2 years equiv- alent dosing, is recommended as a first-line systemic therapy option regardless of histologies or PD-L1 sta- tus for unresectable MPM [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
 
Maintenance gemcitabine is not routinely recommended in patients with non-progressive MPM but may prolong PFS and can be considered when the benefits of defer- ring progression outweigh the inconveniences and toxic- ities of ongoing treatment [II, C].
Maintenance pemetrexed is not recommended in pa- tients with non-progressive MPM after first-line platinumepemetrexed ChT [II, E].
Systemic therapy for second line and beyond
Single-agent pembrolizumab in immunotherapy-naïve patients as second-line therapy has similar outcomes to single-agent ChT and is a treatment option [II, C].
Single-agent nivolumab is superior to BSC in pretreated immunotherapy-naïve patients and is a treatment option [I, A].
Combination nivolumabeipilimumab can be considered in immunotherapy-naïve patients as a second- or third- line treatment option [II, C].
Reintroduction of platinumepemetrexed [II, B] or peme- trexed ChT [III, C] has second-line activity in selected cir- cumstances, as suggested by ORRs.
Single-agent gemcitabine or vinorelbine [II, B] has limited second-line activity, as suggested by ORRs or OS, with encouraging activity for gemcitabineeramucirumab combination [III, C].
There is no evidence basis for routine third-line therapy in MPM. Clinical trial participation should be considered [V, C].
Personalised therapy
PD-L1 expression, immune microenvironment analyses or tumour mutational burden should not be used to select patients for treatment with ICIs [I, D].
No current treatment options warrant routine molecular testing of MPM [III, D].
Screening of BAP1-deficient MPM patients for germline mutation is not recommended in the absence of family history suspicious for a BAP1 syndrome [V, D].
Role of RT
RT can be considered for palliation of pain related to local infiltration of thoracic structures [III, B].
The use of prophylactic RT of tracts after diagnostic or therapeutic pleural procedures to prevent chest wall me- tastases is not recommended [I, D].
RT can be considered in an adjuvant setting after MCR to reduce the local failure rate; however, no evidence is available for its use as a standard treatment [II, D].
When postoperative RT is applied, strict thoracic critical organs dose constraints must be adhered to in order to avoid toxicity to OARs [II, A].


FOLLOW-UP, LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND SURVIVORSHIP
Supportive care
As systemic treatment for mesothelioma is not considered curative, maintaining palliative and supportive care is
 
S. Popat et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
paramount to ensuring adequate QoL. Such measures should be cross-referenced with the ESMO CPGs on sup- portive and palliative care.86 These guidelines are relevant for issues commonly occurring in MPM, including cancer- related fatigue, cancer pain, dyspnoea and advanced care planning. The aforementioned sections on RT and surgery also include guidance on the palliative use of these mo- dalities. Night sweats are common but there is no consensus on management. While early parallel referral to palliative care services may be considered, a large, rando- mised trial has demonstrated that early (peridiagnostic) referral to specialist palliative care services does not improve health-related QoL.87 Hence, specialist palliative care referrals can be reserved until clinically needed, at least in MPM patients who are cared for in centres with good access to supportive and palliative care. Nevertheless, despite an adequate PS at diagnosis, there remains a high symptom burden. Recurrent pleural effusion may be prob- lematic for some patients and early pleurodesis is appro- priate; however, if the lung is trapped, an IPC may promote pleurodesis and provide good symptom relief. There is no additional benefit for aggressive daily drainage over symptom-driven pleural draining in breathlessness control.88
People with mesothelioma have high rates of pre- sarcopenia and malnutrition, which impact on QoL and physical activity,89 and general guidance from the ESMO CPG on cancer cachexia in adult patients should be followed.90
Response evaluation and follow-up
It is advised that response evaluation is carried out with contrast-enhanced CT scanning and examinations carried out at presentation. The follow-up of a patient will depend on the local institutional recommendations. For clinical trial evaluation, the modified for mesothelioma Response Eval- uation Criteria In Solid Tumours (RECIST) v1.1 criteria are recommended.91

Recommendations
Palliative and supportive care
Early access to specialist palliative care at the time of diagnosis does not improve QoL [I, D].
Pleurodesis is useful in preventing recurrent effusions [I, A].
For recurrent pleural effusions, an IPC can provide good clinical benefit [I, B].
For patients with IPCs aggressive draining is not superior in breathlessness control to symptomatic drainage [I, E].
Surveillance
Response evaluation imaging is best carried out with contrast-enhanced CT scanning [III, B].

METHODOLOGY
This CPG was developed in accordance with the ESMO stan- dard operating procedures for CPGs development (http:// www.esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology).
 
The relevant literature has been selected by the expert au- thors. An ESMO-MCBS table with ESMO-MCBS scores is included in Supplementary Table S3, available at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.005. ESMO-MCBS v1.192 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA and/or the FDA (https://www.esmo. org/Guidelines/ESMO-MCBS). The scores have been calcu- lated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee.The FDA/EMA approval status of new therapies/indications is correct at the time of writing this CPG. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Supplementary Table S4, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc. 2021.11.005.93 Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the authors.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
SP acknowledges NHS funding to the Royal Marsden Hos- pital/Institute of Cancer Research NIHR-Biomedical Research Centre. CFF is supported by a grant from the NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre. NG and AS acknowledge the European Reference Network for Rare Solid Adult Cancers (EURACAN) for valuable input and networking. Manuscript editing support was provided by Richard Lutz, Louise Green, Catherine Evans and Jennifer Lamarre (ESMO Guidelines staff); this support was funded by ESMO. Nathan Cherny, Chair of the ESMO-MCBS Working Group, Urani Dafni ESMO-MCBS Working Group Member/ Frontier Science Foundation Hellas and Giota Zygoura of Frontier Science Foundation Hellas provided review and validation of the ESMO-MCBS scores. Nicola Latino (ESMO Scientific Affairs staff) provided coordination and support of the ESMO-MCBS scores and Angela Corstorphine of KMC provided medical writing and editing support in the prep- aration of the ESMO-MCBS table; this support was funded by ESMO.

FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.

DISCLOSURE
SP has received honoraria and consultant fees from Astra- Zeneca, Roche, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, Novartis, Takeda, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), EMD Serono, Bayer, Blueprint, Daiichi Sankyo, Guardant Health, Janssen, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), BeiGene, Incyte, Eli Lilly, Seattle Genetics and Amgen; received institutional research funding from AstraZeneca, Roche, Boehringer Ingelheim, Clovis, Celgene, Novartis, Takeda, Ariad, BMS, MSD, Daiichi Sankyo, Guardant Health, Janssen, Epizyme, GSK, Mirati, Trizel and Turning Point Therapeutics. PB has received institutional research funding from Astra- Zeneca, BMS and MSD; holds non-remunerated consulting and advisory board roles for BMS, MSD, Pfizer, Epizyme, Trizel and Daiichi. IO holds an advisory board role for
 
Annals of Oncology	S. Popat et al.

 
AstraZeneca; has received speakers fee from Roche and an institutional research grant from Medtronic and Roche. AS has an advisory board role for BMS, MSD, AstraZeneca and Roche and has received an institutional research grant from BMS. CFF has received institutional honoraria from Astra- Zeneca and institutional research funding from AstraZeneca and Elekta. AGN has received honoraria and consultant fees from Merck, BMS, AstraZeneca, Roche, Boehringer Ingel- heim, Pfizer, Novartis, Eli Lilly, AbbVie and Oncologica; has received institutional research funding from Pfizer and has produced educational content for AstraZeneca, Pfizer, UpToDate and European Society of Oncology. NG has received honoraria and consultant fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Lilly, MSD, Roche and Trizell; has received institutional research funding from AstraZe- neca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Lilly, MSD, Roche and Trizell; has received hospitality/travel expenses from AstraZeneca, BMS, Roche and has an immediate family member who is an employee of AstraZeneca. AKN has received honoraria and consultant fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, MSA Pharma, Trizell, Roche, Douglas Pharmaceuticals, Atara Biotherapeutics, Seagen, PharmAb- cine, BMS and UpToDate; has received institutional research funding from AstraZeneca and Douglas Pharmaceuticals. MR has received honoraria for consultancy and lectures from Amgen, AstraZeneca, BMS, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Merck, Mirati, MSD, Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, Regeneron, Roche and Sanofi Bioepis.

REFERENCES
1.	Alpert N, van Gerwen M, Taioli E. Epidemiology of mesothelioma in the 21st century in Europe and the United States, 40 years after restricted/ banned asbestos use. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2020;9(suppl 1):S28-S38.
2.	Chen T, Sun X-M, Wu L. High time for complete ban on asbestos use in developing countries. JAMA Oncol. 2019;5(6):779-780.
3.	Sirri E, Kieschke J, Vohmann C, et al. Survival of malignant mesothe- lioma and other rare thoracic cancers in Germany and the United States: a population-based study. Int J Cancer. 2020;147(6):1548-1558.
4.	Current Asbestos Bans. Available at http://www.ibasecretariat.org/ alpha_ban_list.php. Accessed December 6, 2021.
5.	Royal College of Physicians. National Mesothelioma Audit Report 2020 (Audit Period 2016-18). London: RCP; 2020.
6.	Maskell NA, Gleeson FV, Davies RJO. Standard pleural biopsy versus CT- guided cutting-needle biopsy for diagnosis of malignant disease in pleural effusions: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2003;361(9366):1326-1330.
7.	Greillier L, Cavailles A, Fraticelli A, et al. Accuracy of pleural biopsy using thoracoscopy for the diagnosis of histologic subtype in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. Cancer. 2007;110(10):2248-2252.
8.	Greillier L, Baas P, Welch JJ, et al. Biomarkers for malignant pleural mesothelioma: current status. Mol Diagn Ther. 2008;12(6):375-390.
9.	WHO Classification of Tumours Editorial Board. Thoracic Tumours. 5th ed. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2020.
10.	Marchevsky AM, Khoor A, Walts AE, et al. Localized malignant meso- thelioma, an unusual and poorly characterized neoplasm of serosal origin: best current evidence from the literature and the International Mesothelioma Panel. Mod Pathol. 2020;33(2):281-296.
11.	Nicholson AG, Sauter JL, Nowak AK, et al. EURACAN/IASLC proposals for updating the histologic classification of pleural mesothelioma: towards a more multidisciplinary approach. J Thorac Oncol. 2020;15(1):29-49.
12.	Rosen LE, Karrison T, Ananthanarayanan V, et al. Nuclear grade and necrosis predict prognosis in malignant epithelioid pleural mesotheli- oma: a multi-institutional study. Mod Pathol. 2018;31(4):598-606.
13.	 
Papotti M, Nicholson AG, Dacic S. Mesothelioma and immunohis- tochemsitry. In: Yatabe Y, Borczuk AC, Cooper WA, et al., editors. IASLC Atlas of Diagnostic Immunohistochemistry. Denver, Colorado: IASLC; 2020. p. 157-166.
14.	Husain AN, Colby TV, Ordóñez NG, et al. Guidelines for pathologic diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma 2017 update of the consensus statement from the International Mesothelioma Interest Group. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2018;142(1):89-108.
15.	Zhang YZ, Brambilla C, Molyneaux PL, et al. Utility of nuclear grading system in epithelioid malignant pleural mesothelioma in biopsy-heavy setting: an external validation study of 563 cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 2020;44(3):347-356.
16.	Chapel DB, Schulte JJ, Berg K, et al. MTAP immunohistochemistry is an accurate and reproducible surrogate for CDKN2A ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization in diagnosis of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Mod Pathol. 2020;33(2):245-254.
17.	Churg A, Galateau-Salle F, Roden AC, et al. Malignant mesothelioma in situ: morphologic features and clinical outcome. Mod Pathol. 2020;33(2):297-302.
18.	Pleural mesothelioma. In: Brierley J, Gospodarowicz MK, Wittekind C, editors. TNM Classiﬁcation of Malignant Tumours.. 8th ed. Chichester, West Sussex/Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2017. p. 113-114.
19.	Rice D, Chansky K, Nowak A, et al. The IASLC mesothelioma staging project: proposals for revisions of the N descriptors in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification for pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(12):2100-2111.
20.	Rusch VW, Chansky K, Kindler HL, et al. The IASLC mesothelioma staging project: proposals for the M descriptors and for revision of the TNM stage groupings in the forthcoming (eighth) edition of the TNM classi- fication for mesothelioma. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(12):2112-2119.
21.	Billé A, Krug LM, Woo KM, et al. Contemporary analysis of prognostic factors in patients with unresectable malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(2):249-255.
22.	Zahid I, Sharif S, Routledge T, Scarci M. What is the best way to di- agnose and stage malignant pleural mesothelioma? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2011;12(2):254-259.
23.	Nowak AK, Chansky K, Rice DC, et al. The IASLC mesothelioma staging project: proposals for revisions of the T descriptors in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification for pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(12):2089-2099.
24.	Sugarbaker DJ, Richards WG, Bueno R. Extrapleural pneumonectomy in the treatment of epithelioid malignant pleural mesothelioma: novel prognostic implications of combined N1 and N2 nodal involvement based on experience in 529 patients. Ann Surg. 2014;260(4):577-582.
25.	Kircheva DY, Husain AN, Watson S, et al. Specimen weight and volume: important predictors of survival in malignant pleural mesothelioma. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;49(6):1642-1647.
26.	Opitz I, Scherpereel A, Berghmans T, et al. ERS/ESTS/EACTS/ESTRO guidelines for the management of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2020;58(1):1-24.
27.	Rintoul RC, Ritchie AJ, Edwards JG, et al. Efficacy and cost of video- assisted thoracoscopic partial pleurectomy versus talc pleurodesis in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma (MesoVATS): an open- label, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet. 2014;384(9948):1118-1127.
28.	Freeman RK, Ascioti AJ, Dake M, Mahidhara RS. A propensity-matched comparison of pleurodesis or tunneled pleural catheter for heart fail- ure patients with recurrent pleural effusion. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;97(6):1872-1877.
29.	Matthews C, Freeman C, Sharples LD, et al. MesoTRAP: a feasibility study that includes a pilot clinical trial comparing video-assisted thoracoscopic partial pleurectomy decortication with indwelling pleural catheter in patients with trapped lung due to malignant pleural mesothelioma designed to address recruitment and randomisation uncertainties and sample size requirements for a phase III trial. BMJ Open Resp Res. 2019;6(1):e000368.
30.	Cao C, Tian D, Park J, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of surgical treatments for malignant pleural mesothelioma. Lung Cancer. 2014;83(2):240-245.
 
S. Popat et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
31.	Taioli E, Wolf AS, Flores RM. Meta-analysis of survival after pleur- ectomy decortication versus extrapleural pneumonectomy in meso- thelioma. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;99(2):472-480.
32.	Treasure T, Lang-Lazdunski L, Waller D, et al. Extra-pleural pneumo- nectomy versus no extra-pleural pneumonectomy for patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma: clinical outcomes of the Mesotheli- oma and Radical Surgery (MARS) randomised feasibility study. Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(8):763-772.
33.	Saddoughi SA, Abdelsattar ZM, Blackmon SH. National trends in the epidemiology of malignant pleural mesothelioma: a national cancer data base study. Ann Thorac Surg. 2018;105(2):432-437.
34.	Rosskamp M, Macq G, Nackaerts K, et al. Real-life treatment practice for malignant pleural mesothelioma in Belgium. Lung Cancer. 2018;125:258-264.
35.	Vogelzang NJ, Rusthoven JJ, Symanowski J, et al. Phase III study of pemetrexed in combination with cisplatin versus cisplatin alone in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21(14):2636-2644.
36.	van Meerbeeck JP, Gaafar R, Manegold C, et al. Randomized phase III study of cisplatin with or without raltitrexed in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma: an intergroup study of the European Organi- sation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Lung Cancer Group and the National Cancer Institute of Canada. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23(28): 6881-6889.
37.	Boyer MJ, Jassem J, Liepa AM, et al. O-56 Symptom and quality of life advantages for pemetrexed cisplatin versus cisplatin in treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Lung Cancer. 2003;41:S19.
38.	Taylor P, Castagneto B, Dark G, et al. Single-agent pemetrexed for chemonaïve and pretreated patients with malignant pleural meso- thelioma: results of an international expanded access program. J Thorac Oncol. 2008;3(7):764-771.
39.	Baas P, Scherpereel A, Nowak AK, et al. First-line nivolumab plus ipi- limumab in unresectable malignant pleural mesothelioma (CheckMate 743): a multicentre, randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2021;397(10272):375-386.
40.	Zalcman G, Mazieres J, Margery J, et al. Bevacizumab for newly diag- nosed pleural mesothelioma in the Mesothelioma Avastin Cisplatin Pemetrexed Study (MAPS): a randomised, controlled, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2016;387(10026):1405-1414.
41.	Eberst G, Anota A, Scherpereel A, et al. Health-related quality of life impact from adding bevacizumab to cisplatin-pemetrexed in malignant pleural mesothelioma in the MAPS IFCT-GFPC-0701 phase III trial. Clin Cancer Res. 2019;25(19):5759-5765.
42.	Scagliotti GV, Gaafar R, Nowak AK, et al. Nintedanib in combination with pemetrexed and cisplatin for chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced malignant pleural mesothelioma (LUME-Meso): a double- blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2019;7(7):569-580.
43.	Peters S, Scherpereel A, Cornelissen R, et al. LBA65 First-line nivolumab (NIVO) plus ipilimumab (IPI) vs chemotherapy (chemo) in patients (pts) with unresectable malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM): 3-year update from CheckMate 743. Ann Oncol. 2021;32:S1341-S1342.
44.	Scherpereel A, Antonia S, Bautista Y, et al. LBA1 First-line nivolumab (NIVO) plus ipilimumab (IPI) versus chemotherapy (chemo) for the treatment of unresectable malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM): patient-reported outcomes (PROs) from CheckMate 743. Ann Oncol. 2020;31:S1441.
45.	Scherpereel A, Wallyn F, Albelda SM, Munck C. Novel therapies for malignant pleural mesothelioma. Lancet Oncol. 2018;19(3):e161-e172.
46.	Dudek AZ, Wang X, Gu L, et al. Randomized study of maintenance pemetrexed versus observation for treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma: CALGB 30901. Clin Lung Cancer. 2020;21(6):553-561.e1.
47.	de Gooijer CJ, van der Noort V, Stigt JA, et al. Switch-maintenance gemcitabine after first-line chemotherapy in patients with malignant mesothelioma (NVALT19): an investigator-initiated, randomised, open- label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2021;9(6):585-592.
48.	Fennell DA, Baas P, Taylor P, et al. Maintenance defactinib versus placebo after first-line chemotherapy in patients with Merlin-Stratified
 
pleural mesothelioma: COMMANDda double-blind, randomized, phase II study. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(10):790-798.
49.	Fennell DA, Casbard AC, Porter C, et al. A randomized phase II trial of oral vinorelbine as second-line therapy for patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(suppl 15):8507.
50.	Popat S, Curioni-Fontecedro A, Dafni U, et al. A multicentre rando- mised phase III trial comparing pembrolizumab versus single-agent chemotherapy for advanced pre-treated malignant pleural mesotheli- oma: the European Thoracic Oncology Platform (ETOP 9-15) PROMISE- meso trial. Ann Oncol. 2020;31(12):1734-1745.
51.	Maio M, Scherpereel A, Calabrò L, et al. Tremelimumab as second- line or third-line treatment in relapsed malignant mesothelioma (DETERMINE): a multicentre, international, randomised, double- blind, placebo-controlled phase 2b trial. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(9): 1261-1273.
52.	Alley EW, Lopez J, Santoro A, et al. Clinical safety and activity of pembrolizumab in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma (KEYNOTE-028): preliminary results from a non-randomised, open-la- bel, phase 1b trial. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(5):623-630.
53.	Desai A, Karrison T, Rose B, et al. Phase II trial of pembrolizumab (P) in patients (pts) with previously-treated mesothelioma (MM). J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(suppl 15):8565.
54.	Quispel-Janssen J, van der Noort V, de Vries JF, et al. Programmed death 1 blockade with nivolumab in patients with recurrent malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Oncol. 2018;13(10):1569-1576.
55.	Hassan R, Thomas A, Nemunaitis JJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of ave- lumab treatment in patients with advanced unresectable mesotheli- oma: phase 1b results from the JAVELIN solid tumor trial. JAMA Oncol. 2019;5(3):351.
56.	Okada M, Kijima T, Aoe K, et al. Clinical efficacy and safety of nivolu- mab: results of a multicenter, open-label, single-arm, Japanese phase II study in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MERIT). Clin Cancer Res. 2019;25(18):5485-5492.
57.	Scherpereel A, Mazieres J, Greillier L, et al. Nivolumab or nivolumab plus ipilimumab in patients with relapsed malignant pleural meso- thelioma (IFCT-1501 MAPS2): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, non-comparative, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2019;20(2):239-253.
58.	Fennell DA, Ewings S, Ottensmeier C, et al. Nivolumab versus placebo in patients with relapsed malignant mesothelioma (CONFIRM): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2021;22(11):1530-1540.
59.	Petrelli F, Ardito R, Conti B, et al. A systematic review and meta- analysis of second-line therapies for treatment of mesothelioma. Respir Med. 2018;141:72-80.
60.	Pinto C, Zucali PA, Pagano M, et al. Gemcitabine with or without ramucirumab as second-line treatment for malignant pleural meso- thelioma (RAMES): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2021;22(10):1438-1447.
61.	Ghanim B, Rosenmayr A, Stockhammer P, et al. Tumour cell PD-L1 expression is prognostic in patients with malignant pleural effusion: the impact of C-reactive protein and immune-checkpoint inhibition. Sci Rep. 2020;10(1):5784.
62.	Calabrò L, Morra A, Giannarelli D, et al. Tremelimumab combined with durvalumab in patients with mesothelioma (NIBIT-MESO-1): an open- label, non-randomised, phase 2 study. Lancet Respir Med. 2018;6(6): 451-460.
63.	Disselhorst MJ, Quispel-Janssen J, Lalezari F, et al. Ipilimumab and nivolumab in the treatment of recurrent malignant pleural mesothe- lioma (INITIATE): results of a prospective, single-arm, phase 2 trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2019;7(3):260-270.
64.	Hmeljak J, Sanchez-Vega F, Hoadley KA, et al. Integrative molecular characterization of malignant pleural mesothelioma. Cancer Discov. 2018;8(12):1548-1565.
65.	Carbone M, Yang H, Pass HI, et al. BAP1 and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013;13(3):153-159.
66.	Oehl K, Vrugt B, Wagner U, et al. Alterations in BAP1 are associated with cisplatin resistance through inhibition of apoptosis in malignant pleural mesothelioma. Clin Cancer Res. 2021;27(8):2277-2291.
 
Annals of Oncology	S. Popat et al.

 
67.	Hassan R, Morrow B, Thomas A, et al. Inherited predisposition to malignant mesothelioma and overall survival following platinum chemotherapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019;116(18):9008-9013.
68.	Fennell DA, King A, Mohammed S, et al. Rucaparib in patients with BAP1-deficient or BRCA1-deficient mesothelioma (MiST1): an open- label, single-arm, phase 2a clinical trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2021;9(6): 593-600.
69.	Macleod N, Price A, O’Rourke N, et al. Radiotherapy for the treatment of pain in malignant pleural mesothelioma: a systematic review. Lung Cancer. 2014;83(2):133-138.
70.	MacLeod N, Chalmers A, O’Rourke N, et al. Is radiotherapy useful for treating pain in mesothelioma? A phase II trial. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;10(6):944-950.
71.	Clive AO, Taylor H, Dobson L, et al. Prophylactic radiotherapy for the prevention of procedure-tract metastases after surgical and large-bore pleural procedures in malignant pleural mesothelioma (SMART): a multicentre, open-label, phase 3, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(8):1094-1104.
72.	Bayman N, Appel W, Ashcroft L, et al. Prophylactic irradiation of tracts in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma: an open-label, multicenter, phase III randomized trial. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(14): 1200-1208.
73.	Lee CC, Soon YY, Vellayappan B, et al. Prophylactic irradiation of tracts in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2021;160:103278.
74.	Kristensen CA, Nøttrup TJ, Berthelsen AK, et al. Pulmonary toxicity following IMRT after extrapleural pneumonectomy for malignant pleural mesothelioma. Radiother Oncol. 2009;92(1):96-99.
75.	Minatel E, Trovo M, Polesel J, et al. Tomotherapy after pleurectomy/ decortication or biopsy for malignant pleural mesothelioma allows the delivery of high dose of radiation in patients with intact lung. J Thorac Oncol. 2012;7(12):1862-1866.
76.	Rice DC, Smythe WR, Liao Z, et al. Dose-dependent pulmonary toxicity after postoperative intensity-modulated radiotherapy for malignant pleural mesothelioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;69(2):350-357.
77.	Stahel RA, Riesterer O, Xyrafas A, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy and extrapleural pneumonectomy of malignant pleural mesothelioma with or without hemithoracic radiotherapy (SAKK 17/04): a randomised, international, multicentre phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(16): 1651-1658.
78.	Minatel E, Trovo M, Bearz A, et al. Radical radiation therapy after lung- sparing surgery for malignant pleural mesothelioma: survival, pattern of failure, and prognostic factors. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;93(3):606-613.
79.	Rimner A, Zauderer MG, Gomez DR, et al. Phase II study of hemi- thoracic intensity-modulated pleural radiation therapy (IMPRINT) as
 
part of lung-sparing multimodality therapy in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(23):2761-2768.
80.	Yorke ED, Jackson A, Kuo LC, et al. Heart dosimetry is correlated with risk of radiation pneumonitis after lung-sparing hemithoracic pleural intensity modulated radiation therapy for malignant pleural meso- thelioma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2017;99(1):61-69.
81.	de Perrot M, Feld R, Leighl NB, et al. Accelerated hemithoracic radia- tion followed by extrapleural pneumonectomy for malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;151(2):468-475.
82.	Schröder C, Opitz I, Guckenberger M, et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) as salvage therapy for oligorecurrent pleural meso- thelioma after multi-modality therapy. Front Oncol. 2019;9:961.
83.	Lin L, Kang M, Huang S, et al. Beam-specific planning target volumes incorporating 4D CT for pencil beam scanning proton therapy of thoracic tumors. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015;16(6):281-292.
84.	Rice SR, Li YR, Busch TM, et al. A novel prospective study assessing the combination of photodynamic therapy and proton radiation therapy: safety and outcomes when treating malignant pleural mesothelioma. Photochem Photobiol. 2019;95(1):411-418.
85.	Li YR, Alley EW, Friedberg J, et al. ORAL26.06 prospective assessment of proton therapy for malignant pleural mesothelioma. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;10(9):S224.
86.	ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines: Supportive and Palliative Care. Available at https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/supportive-and-palliative- care. Accessed December 6, 2021.
87.	Brims F, Gunatilake S, Lawrie I, et al. Early specialist palliative care on quality of life for malignant pleural mesothelioma: a randomised controlled trial. Thorax. 2019;74(4):354-361.
88.	Muruganandan S, Azzopardi M, Fitzgerald DB, et al. Aggressive versus symptom-guided drainage of malignant pleural effusion via indwelling pleural catheters (AMPLE-2): an open-label randomised trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2018;6(9):671-680.
89.	Jeffery E, Lee YCG, Newton RU, et al. Body composition and nutritional status in malignant pleural mesothelioma: implications for activity levels and quality of life. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2019;73(10):1412-1421.
90.	Arends J, Strasser F, Gonella S, et al. Cancer cachexia in adult pa- tients: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. ESMO Open. 2021;6(3): 100092.
91.	Armato SG, Nowak AK. Revised modified response evaluation criteria in solid tumors for assessment of response in malignant pleural me- sothelioma (Version 1.1). J Thorac Oncol. 2018;13(7):1012-1021.
92.	Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J, et al. ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(10):2340-2366.
93.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144 (adapted from: Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;1918:1421).
