
 
SPECIAL ARTICLE
 
Annals of Oncology 29: 1687–1700, 2018 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy167
Published online 19 June 2018
 

 

 

M. Hutchings1*, M. Ladetto2, C. Buske3, P. de Nully Brown1, A. J. M. Ferreri4, M. Pfreundschuh5†,
N. Schmitz6, A. Sureda Balari7, G. van Imhoff8, J. Walewski9 & the ESMO Lymphoma Consensus Conference Panel Members‡
1Department of Hematology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; 2Hematology Division, Azienda Ospedaliera Santi Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy; 3Comprehensive Cancer Center Ulm and Department of Internal Medicine III, Institute of Experimental Cancer Research University Hospital, Ulm, Germany; 4Department of Onco-Hematology Medicine, Unit of Lymphoid Malignancies, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy; 5Innere Medizin I, University Klinik des Saarlandes, Hamburg; 6Department of Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Asklepios Klinik St. Georg, Hamburg, Germany; 7Servei d’Hematologia, Institut Catala` d’Oncologia – Hospital Duran i Reynals, Barcelona, Spain; 8Department of Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands; 9Department of Lymphoid Malignancies, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Institute – Oncology Center, Warsaw, Poland

*Correspondence to: Dr Martin Hutchings, ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Deceased.
‡See appendix for members of the ESMO Lymphoma Consensus Conference.



The European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) consensus conference on malignant lymphoma was held on 20 June 2015 in Lugano, Switzerland, and included a multidisciplinary panel of 25 leading experts. The aim of the conference was to develop recommendations on critical subjects difficult to consider in detail in the ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. The following areas were identified: (1) the elderly patient, (2) prognostic factors suitable for clinical use and (3) the ‘ultra-high-risk’ group. Before the conference, the expert panel was divided into three working groups; each group focused on one of these areas in order to address clinically relevant questions relating to that topic. All relevant scientific literature, as identified by the experts, was reviewed in advance. During the consensus conference, each working group developed recommendations to address each of the questions devised by their group. These recommendations were then presented to the entire multidisciplinary panel and a consensus was reached. This manuscript presents recommendations regarding the management of the following ‘ultra-high-risk’ situations:
(1) early central nervous system relapse of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, (2) primary refractory Hodgkin lymphoma and
(3) plasmablastic lymphoma. Results, including a summary of evidence supporting each recommendation, are detailed in this manuscript. All expert panel members approved this final article.
Key words: lymphoma, consensus, high-risk, aggressive, primary resistance, relapse



 

 
Despite the high chemosensitivity of aggressive B-cell lympho- mas, a large proportion of patients still respond poorly to therapy and eventually die from their disease. A number of clinical and pathological factors define groups of patients who are at very high risk of such treatment failure. For these ‘ultra-high-risk’ patients, there is no international consensus regarding the opti- mal management approach.
In 2015, the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) held a consensus conference on malignant lymphoma in order to
 
develop recommendations on critical subjects that were difficult to consider in detail in the ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs). In this consensus conference, one of the working groups focussed on ultra-high-risk patients. As such, the objectives of this working group were: (1) to identify a number of ultra-high- risk patient categories where guidelines were lacking and a con- sensus on management was likely to be reached; (2) to critically review the available literature describing the management of these patient groups; (3) to provide recommendations on the management of ultra-high-risk patients in the context of clinical
 

VC   The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 

 

 
research and routine practice. Here we describe the recommen- dations developed and provide a summary of evidence support- ing each recommendation.


 
A consensus panel, comprising a multidisciplinary group of 25 experts in the management of lymphoma, was convened by ESMO. Three consensus conference chairs (C. Buske, M. Ladetto and M. Hutchings) were also appointed. The consensus panel was divided into three working groups, each of which was assigned a specific subject area and a working group chair as follows:
1.	The elderly patient (Chair: C. Buske)
2.	Prognostic factors suitable for clinical use (Chair: M. Ladetto)
3.	The ‘ultra-high-risk’ group (Chair: M. Hutchings)
The consensus conference was held on 20 June 2015 in Lugano, Switzerland. Before this consensus conference, three to four clinically-relevant questions were identified for each subject area. For working group 3, the following three areas relating to the management of ‘ultra-high-risk’ patients with malignant lymphoma were identified for discussion:
1.	How to predict, prevent and treat early central nervous sys- tem (CNS) relapse after ﬁrst-line treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
2.	Management of primary resistant Hodgkin lymphoma (HL)
3.	Management of plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL)
The selection of these three areas was a result of thorough discussions in the working group, where we agreed that these were areas of particular clinical importance with a lack of clear consensus. It is acknowledged that this selection does not cover all important high-risk situations in lymphoma management. We considered including the management of double-hit DLBCL, but eventually this topic was omitted since (1) this would require a full paper of its own, and (2) it is already covered by a number of separate guidelines, including the ESMO CPG for DLBCL [1].
 
A literature review was conducted by each working group before the consensus conference, with each group responsible for compiling a summary of relevant information required to develop recommendations relating to each of their questions at the conference. No systematic literature search was under- taken. During the conference, in parallel sessions, the three working groups discussed and agreed on recommendations relating to each of their assigned questions. The level of evi- dence and strength of each recommendation was also noted, which were defined based on an adapted version of the ‘Infectious Diseases Society of America-United States Public Health Service Grading System’, as presented in Table 1 [2]. Recommendations from each group were then presented to the entire panel of experts, where they were discussed and modified as required. Finally, a vote was conducted to determine the level of agreement amongst the expert panel for each of the recom- mendations. Panel members were allowed to abstain from voting.
Results from the section of the consensus conference dedicated to the management of ‘ultra-high-risk’ patients with malignant lymphoma, together with a summary of evidence supporting each recommendation, are detailed in this article, and a summary of these recommendations is included in Table 2. However, these additional recommendations should be read in conjunction with the already-published ESMO CPGs for the diagnosis, treatment and follow-up of malignant lymphomas [1, 3–8].


 
1.	How to predict, prevent and treat CNS relapse of systemic DLBCL

Risk of CNS disease. Estimation of the individual patient’s risk of CNS disease [defined as progression during or recurrence after first-line treatment with involvement of the brain parenchyma or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)] is largely based on reports from single institutions [9, 10] and cooperative groups [11]. During the last
 
Table 2. Summary of recommendations

Guidelines statement	LoE	GoR	Consensus

 
1.	How to predict, prevent and treat early CNS relapse after ﬁrst-line treatment of DLBCL Recommendations:
1.1	IPI parameters (age >60 years, high LDH levels, poor PS, advanced disease stage and more than one extra-
nodal site) are risk factors for early CNS relapse following ﬁrst-line treatment of DLBCL, with a direct relationship between the number of unfavourable features and the CNS risk. The involvement of the testes, kidneys, adrenals, breast, bone marrow and bone has also been reported to increase the risk of CNS disease.
1.2	Patients with DLBCL considered as high risk for CNS relapse should be assessed by brain MRI and CSF assessment by conventional cytology examination and ﬂow cytometry
1.3	There is little or no role for i.t. chemotherapy for patients with DLBCL considered as high risk for CNS relapse.
i.v. prophylaxis is an option for high-risk patients without evidence of CNS involvement, even though the level of supporting evidence is low. Patients with MRI or CSF evidence of CNS involvement at presentation should receive a combination of anti-lymphoma drugs with good CNS bioavailability, aimed at controlling both CNS and systemic disease, preferably within a clinical trial
 


II	B	100% yes (18 voters)



III	C	100% yes (18 voters)

III	C	100% yes (18 voters)
 

2.	Management of primary resistant HL Recommendations:
2.1	For patients with primary resistant HL, there is no evidence to suggest a beneﬁt from treating any differently to other patients with relapsed Hodgkin lymphoma. As such, these patients should be treated the same as other patients with relapsing HL, preferably as part of a clinical trial
2.2	The use of BV and CPIs seem to be particularly beneﬁcial for patients with primary resistant HL who are less likely to beneﬁt from conventional therapies. Consolidation with BV after HDT and ASCT is recommended for patients with primary resistant HL
2.3	AlloSCT has a limited role for patients with primary resistant HL but can be considered in selected patients with a good, durable remission and a suitable donor
 



III	D	100% yes (18 voters)


II	B	No vote obtained


IV	D	100% yes (18 voters)
 

3.	Management of PBL Recommendations:
3.1	For HIV-negative patients with suspected PBL, diagnostic assessment should include an IHC panel of CD38, CD20, PAX5, CD138, EBER, CD30, MUM-1, Kappa-lambda, HHV8 and ALK
3.2	HIV-negative patients with PBL should be treated the same as other high-risk subtypes of DLBCL, although rituximab should not be used
3.3	Although bortezomib can be safely combined with CHOP, this has not led to improved outcomes and further studies are required
3.4	HD-ASCT may play a role in the management of PBL but further studies are required, since available data are from casuistic reports of selected patients
 



IV	C	100% yes (18 voters)

IV	C	100% yes (18 voters)

V	C	100% yes (18 voters)

IV	D	100% yes (18 voters)
 

alloSCT, allogenic stem cell transplant; ASCT, autologous stem cell transplantation; BV, brentuximab vedotin; CHOP, cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincris- tine/prednisone; CNS, central nervous system; CPI, checkpoint inhibitor; CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; DLBCL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; EBER, Epstein–Barr virus-encoded RNA; GoR, grade of recommendation; HD-ASCT, high-dose autologous stem cell transplantation; HDT, high-dose therapy; HIV, human im- munodeﬁciency virus; HL, Hodgkin lymphoma; IHC, immunohistochemistry; IPI, International Prognostic Index; i.t., intrathecal; i.v., intravenous; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LoE, level of evidence; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PBL, plasmablastic lymphoma; PS, performance status.


 
decade, a number of investigators either conducted post-hoc analyses of CNS relapses occurring in patients with DLBCL who had been treated in prospective randomised studies [12–14], or analyses carried out on other cohorts of patients with aggressive B-cell lymphoma – most commonly DLBCL [15–21]. These stud- ies varied in several ways, including the varying definitions used for high-risk CNS disease, differing imaging technologies, differ- ing means of assessing CSF involvement, and differing recom- mendations for CNS relapse prophylaxis. These differences influenced not only the percentages of patients diagnosed with CNS relapse, but also the identification of CNS risk factors and the analyses of the value of intrathecal (i.t.) prophylaxis.
Table 3 summarises findings of larger studies (>200 patients)
in patients with aggressive B-cell lymphoma. Risk factors listed
 
are those identified via multivariate analyses of patients treated with R-CHOP (rituximab/cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vin- cristine/prednisone). Collectively, these data demonstrate that secondary CNS involvement is a relatively rare complication of DLBCL, occurring in 2.3%–8.4% of patients. The relatively large variation in frequencies of CNS disease reported by different authors most likely reflect different patient characteristics, par- ticularly differences in age and distribution of International Prognostic Index (IPI) factors. The randomised RICOVER-60 trial demonstrated that the addition of rituximab significantly reduced the incidence of CNS disease [12]; nevertheless, the effect of rituximab appears to be moderate, and the problem presented by CNS disease remains unresolved. The risk factor analyses pre- sented in Table 3, as well as those from other smaller studies from
 



	stagec	
Tomita et al. [21]
82/1221 (6.7%)	NS	NS	NS	NS	Breast	10.5	Age >60 : 2.1
						Adrenal	4.6	
						Bone	2.0	
Schmitz et al. [14]
14/620 (2.3%)	NA	3.8	NS	5.4	NS		R: 0.3, not in high-risk patients
Boehme et al. [12]
22/608 (3.6%)	NR	S	S	NS	NR		ECOG PS >1
Tai et al. [18]
19/320 (6.0%)	NS	NS	NS	NS	Kidney	20.1	ECOG PS >1 : 2.0
						Testis	6.7	non-CR 3.3
						Breast	6.1	
Villa et al. [19]
19/309 (6.1%)	NS	NS	NS	Stage IV 8.0	Kidney	3.3	
Shimazu et al. [17]
20/238 (8.4%)	NR	2.4	2.0	NS	Marrow	2.1	Age >60 : 2.5
Guirguis et al. [16]
8/214 (3.7%)	NS	NS	NS	NS	Testis	33.5	None
Yamamoto et al. [20]
81/203 (3.9%)	NS	NS	NS	NS	NS		
Chihara et al. [15]
9/203 (4.4%)	NS	NS	Any ENS 2.9	NS	NS		Bulk > 7.5 cm: 3.34

















 
the rituximab and pre-rituximab eras, show that individual IPI fac- tors [age >60 years, high lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels, poor performance status (PS), advanced disease stage and more than one extranodal site], and various combinations thereof, have a sig- nificant impact on the risk of CNS disease. In addition, involve-
ments of the testes, kidneys, adrenals, breast, bone marrow and bone have been reported to increase the risk of CNS disease.
A large study of 2196 patients treated with R-CHOP or R-CHOEP (rituximab/cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincris- tine/etoposide/prednisone) in prospective trials conducted by the German High-Grade non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Study Group (Deutsche   Studiengruppe   fu¨r   Hochmaligne   Non-Hodgkin- Lymphome; DSHNHL) [14] showed that the presence of any of
the five IPI factors and involvement of the kidneys/adrenals increased the risk of CNS disease. Still, even the ~6% of patients with four to six risk factors had a 2-year rate of CNS disease of no more than 10%. This model was validated using an independent
 
data set from British Columbia [22] and, more recently, in an international cohort of 1290 positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT)-staged patients [23].
Biological risk factors such as MYC translocation, double-hit lymphomas or the presence of certain adhesion molecules on lymphoma cells have more recently been associated with an increased risk for CNS disease [24–27].

Prophylaxis of CNS disease. Traditionally, prophylaxis of CNS disease in DLBCL consists of i.t. injections of methotrexate (MTX), cytarabine (Ara-C), prednisone/prednisolone, or combi- nations thereof. However, i.t. chemotherapy does not reach measurable concentrations in the brain parenchyma, and thus the general concept of i.t. prophylaxis in patients with DLBCL is controversial. For patients treated with R-CHOP, there is increas- ing evidence from several recent studies (summarised in Table 4) that i.t. prophylaxis is not effective [28, 29]. Given the serious
 
Table 4. Prophylaxis of CNS relapses in studies using (R)-CHOP and variants for treatment of DLBCL

Study	Number of patients	Systemic/i.t. treatment	CNS prophylaxis	CNS relapses (%)

 
Schmitz et al. [14]  2196 (1576 w/o R, 620 w/ R) (R)-CHO(E)Pa
i.t. MTX
 
BM, testis, head, sinuses, orbits, oral cavity, tongue and salivary glands
 
2.6% (all pts)
 

Boehme et al. [12] 1222 (612 w/o R, 610 w/ R)	(R)-CHOP
i.t. MTX
 

BM, testis, head, sinuses, orbits, oral cavity, tongue and salivary glands
 

2.5% (w/o prophylaxis)
4.4% (w/ prophylaxis)
 

Kumar et al. [108]	989 (all w/ R)	R-CHOP
i.t. MTX 6 Ara-C, i.v. MTX
 

At the discretion of investigator	2.1% (w/o prophylaxis) 10.9% (w/ prophylaxis)
 

Tai et al. [18]	499 (179 w/o R, 320 w/ R)	(R)-CHOP
i.t. MTX

Tomita et al. [29]	322 (all w/ R)	R-CHOP
i.t. MTX
 
>1 ENS, orbits, sinuses, breast, testis, bone, BM

" LDH, bulk >10, PS ≥ 2, BM, nasal, bone, breast, skin, testis
 

5% (w/o prophylaxis)
11% (w/ prophylaxis)

2.8% (w/o prophylaxis)
7.5% (w/ prophylaxis)
 

 
Arkenau et al. [28] 259 (177 w/o R, 62 w/ R)	(R)-CHOP
(R)-PmitCEBO
i.t. MTX 6 Ara-C
 
BM, testis, sinuses, orbits, bone, blood	1.1% (CI 0%–2.5%)
2 pts w/o prophylaxis 1 pt w/ prophylaxis
 

Guirguis et al. [16] 214 (all w/ R)	R-CHOP
i.t. MTX (25 pts), i.v. MTX (17 pts)
 
" LDH, >1 ENS, testis, epidural, sinuses or skull
 

2% (w/o prophylaxis)
1.9% (w/ prophylaxis)
 

 
Ferreri et al. [107]	200 (all w/ R)	R-CHOP
i.v. MTX (33 pts)
 
Testis, breast, sinuses, orbits, nasopharynx Advanced stage þ" LDH
 
12% (w/o prophylaxis) 0% (w/ i.v. MTX)
 

aIncludes patients treated with higher doses of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and etoposide and patients treated with dose-escalated sequential HDT and rituximab.
Ara-C, cytarabine; BM, bone marrow; CHOP, cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincristine/prednisone; CI, conﬁdence interval; CNS, central nervous system; DLBCL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; E, etoposide; ENS, extranodal site; HDT, high-dose therapy; i.t., intrathecal; i.v., intravenous; LDH, lactate dehydrogen- ase; MTX, methotrexate; NR, not reported; PS, performance status; pt, patient; R, rituximab; R-PMitCEBO, rituximab/prednisolone/mitoxantrone/cyclophos- phamide/etoposide/bleomycin/vincristine; w/, with; w/o, without.


 
toxicities (leukopenia, infections, mucositis) related to i.t. injec- tions of cytotoxic drugs [30, 31], this practice should be restricted to very high-risk patients or abandoned altogether. The only ex- ception may be for patients with involvement of the testes where
i.t. prophylaxis should be administered in conjunction with spe- cific systemic treatment and local radiotherapy (RT) [32]. For all other organs involved (bone marrow, bone, paranasal sinuses, breast, skin, etc.), the evidence supporting the use of i.t. prophy- laxis is very scarce.
The comparative efficacy of alternative strategies, such as sys- temic high-dose MTX (HD-MTX; >1.5 g/m2), in preventing CNS progression or relapse is currently undergoing clinical
evaluation. The results of the French studies with (R)-ACVBP (rituximab/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide/vindesine/bleo- mycin/prednisone) [33, 34] and phase II studies using one or two courses of HD-MTX in patients treated with R-CHOP [35, 36] indicate that this treatment is effective and should be the prophy- lactic therapy of choice in high-risk patients fit enough to tolerate the associated toxicities. For elderly patients, not only is the dose important but the duration of intravenous (i.v.) infusion as well. For these patients, the duration of HD-MTX infusion should not exceed 4 hours, in which case it is usually well tolerated [37, 38]. In    the    ACVBP    (doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide/vindesine/
 
bleomycin/prednisone) versus CHOP trial conducted by Tilly et al. [33], in patients between the ages of 61 and 69 years, there were significantly fewer isolated CNS relapses in the ACVBP arm, with two i.v. high-dose MTX (3 g/m2) infusions, than in the CHOP arm. However, this dose of MTX may be poorly tolerated in patients over the age of 70 years. According to the German High-Grade Lymphoma Study Group, a HD-MTX dose of
1.5 g/m2, dose-adjusted according to creatinine clearance and given intravenously before the first and after the last R-CHOP, is well tolerated in patients above 70 years of age [39].

Treatment of CNS disease. I.t. injections, whole brain RT and sys- temic administration of cytotoxic drugs not crossing the blood– brain barrier (BBB), have largely been ineffective in the treatment of secondary CNS lymphoma (SCNSL) [40, 41]. The inclusion of drugs which cross the BBB, such as HD-MTX and Ara-C, has pro- duced encouraging results from studies of patients with primary CNS lymphomas [42, 43], resulting in measurable benefits and significantly longer survival. To date, virtually all other drugs known to cross the BBB (procarbazine, etoposide, ifosfamide, thiotepa, carmustine and others) have been used mostly in combination with MTX and/or Ara-C to further improve results [38, 44, 45]. As seen with MTX and Ara-C, most other drugs
 
seem to also be most effective at high doses, and thus require autologous haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Consequently, the most recent and successful protocols to treat primary and SCNSL consist of complex treatment algorithms encompassing two or more courses of HD-MTX and/or Ara-C administered together with other BBB-crossing agents, followed by high-dose therapy (HDT) combining BBB-crossing agents such as carmustine, thiotepa, busulfan or etoposide, which can be dose-escalated if HSCT is conducted [38, 44, 46, 47]. The first prospective phase II study demonstrating the potential of this strategy was reported by Korfel et al. [44]. Patients up to 65 years of age received induction chemotherapy with HD-MTX, ifosfa- mide and dexamethasone followed by HD-Ara-C, thiotepa and dexamethasone. Patients who responded received consolidation HDT with carmustine, thiotepa etoposide and transplantation of autologous blood stem cells. Using this approach, the 2-year treatment failure rate was 49 6 19% and the 2-year overall sur-
vival (OS) rate was 63 6 19%. A further study reported by
Doorduyn et al. in 2012 [46] is of particular interest because it was the first to report on the addition of rituximab to the cyto- toxic agents. The role of rituximab in the treatment of primary CNS lymphoma is supported by a recently published internation- al randomised trial which showed a significant improvement in response and survival rates with the addition of this monoclonal antibody (mAb) [48]. The most recent and largest phase II trial focusing on the treatment of patients with SCNSL was reported by Ferreri and colleagues [49]. In this trial, 38 patients with SCNSL were treated with a sequential combination of MTX-Ara- C-rituximab plus i.t. liposomal Ara-C followed by HD sequential chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, Ara-C and VP-16, con- solidated with carmustine-thiotepa-conditioned autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT). Treatment was feasible, with a complete response (CR) rate of 63% and two-thirds of patients who received ASCT in CR were alive at 5 years. This represents clinically relevant therapeutic progress since none of the long- term survivors required whole-brain RT to achieve tumour re- mission. Moreover, the results of this trial advanced the field be- yond previous studies, demonstrating that subgroups of patients older than 65 years with poor PS or concomitant extra-CNS re- currence have the same OS probability as younger and fit patients and those with isolated CNS relapse.
A number of newer agents such as lenalidomide [50], ibrutinib
[51] and immune checkpoint inhibitors (CPIs) [52] have shown activity in relapsed or refractory primary CNS lymphoma, but the role of these agents alone and in combination with chemo- therapy in the prophylaxis and treatment of early CNS relapse is currently unknown.
Recommendation 1.1: IPI parameters (age >60 years, high LDH levels, poor PS, advanced disease stage and more than one extranodal site) are risk factors for early CNS relapse following
first-line treatment of DLBCL, with a direct relationship between the number of unfavourable features and the CNS risk. The in- volvement of the testes, kidneys, adrenals, breast, bone marrow and bone has also been reported to increase the risk of CNS disease.
Level of evidence: II
Strength of recommendation: B Consensus: 100% yes (18 voters)
 
Recommendation 1.2: Patients with DLBCL considered as high risk for CNS relapse should be assessed by brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and CSF assessment by conventional cytology examination and flow cytometry.
Level of evidence: III
Strength of recommendation: C Consensus: 100% yes (18 voters)
Recommendation 1.3: There is little or no role for i.t. chemo- therapy for patients with DLBCL considered as high risk for CNS relapse. i.v. prophylaxis is an option for high-risk patients with- out evidence of CNS involvement, even though the level of sup- porting evidence is low. Patients with MRI or CSF evidence of CNS involvement at presentation should receive a combination of anti-lymphoma drugs with good CNS bioavailability, aimed at controlling both CNS and systemic disease, preferably within a clinical trial.
Level of evidence: III
Strength of recommendation: C Consensus: 100% yes (18 voters)

2.	Management of primary resistant HL
The majority of HL patients can be cured with risk-adapted treat- ment, including chemotherapy and RT [53]. Even when initially diagnosed with advanced-stage disease, 70% of these patients achieve long-term remission [54]. However, depending on initial risk factors and treatment, 10%–30% experience tumour pro- gression or relapse. Of these patients, around 50% can be cured, providing that they are candidates for HDT and ASCT [55, 56]. The median OS after ASCT failure is 2 years [57, 58]. A signifi- cantly poorer outcome is observed for patients with primary progressive HL or relapse within the first 12 months after initial therapy [59, 60]. HDT is considered the best available option for patients with primary refractory HL [61–64].

Diagnosis and staging of patients with primary refractory HL. Primary refractory HL is defined either by progression at any time during first-line chemotherapy or RT, or by early relapse up to 3 months after the end of treatment. It is generally recommended to confirm treatment failure and lymphoma subtype at the time of disease progression, but in cases where biopsy is not possible, per- sisting abnormalities on PET-CT scan with a Deauville score (DS) of 5 during or after therapy should be considered as suspicious of primary refractory disease [65]. Given the risk of false positive PET results, subsequent anti-lymphoma treatment should not be offered based on PET-CT results alone. In the absence of a positive biopsy and/or very clear clinical symptoms of progressive disease, patients should be monitored by repeat scans to confirm the pres- ence of persistent disease, and even in case of persistent or pro- gressive abnormalities, a biopsy is warranted.

Second- and third-line salvage regimens. A number of available salvage chemotherapy regimens are available for the treatment of relapsed HL [66]. The majority of these are platinum-based or gemcitabine-based combinations and no prospective clinical tri- als indicate any clear benefit (efficacy or toxicity) of one regimen over another one [III, B]. The German Hodgkin Study Group conducted a large, randomised trial which showed no benefit
 
from intensification of a platinum-based salvage regimen before HDT [55]. Overall, it is recommended that 2–3 cycles of a salvage regimen are given before evaluating disease response and con- tinuing with HDT and ASCT.
For patients who fail HDT, or who are not candidates for HDT, a range of single-agent chemotherapy regimens have activity. Of cytostatic agents that are non-cross resistant to the conventional first- and second-line regimens, probably the most active is benda- mustine, with single-agent response rates of approximately 50% but very limited durability of those responses [67].
Several targeted agents, including mAbs, histone deacetylase inhibitors, phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitors, lenalidomide and proteasome inhibitors, have been investigated in HL. However, by far the most import- ant advances in the targeted treatment of relapsed or refractory HL have been the introduction of brentuximab vedotin (BV) and the immune-CPIs. BV, an antibody-drug conjugate composed of an anti-CD30 antibody conjugated to the microtubule- disrupting agent monomethyl auristatin E, demonstrated high overall and CR rates in patients with relapsed/refractory HL after ASCT [68]. BV received both Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) approval in 2011 and 2012, respectively, for patients who relapse or progress after
ASCT, and for those who are not candidates for ASCT and who do not respond to ≥2 lines of chemotherapy. And in 2015 and 2016, the FDA and EMA approved the use of BV for post- transplant consolidation treatment of patients with HL at high risk of relapse or progression. Given its activity, BV could replace
a conventional chemotherapy regimen early in the strategy of sal- vage therapy [III, B], but this possibility requires further evalu- ation. Preliminary studies of BV given in addition to conventional salvage regimens appear promising [69–72].
More recently, the CPIs nivolumab and pembrolizumab, which are mAbs targeting the programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), have demonstrated high activity and durable responses in the majority of patients with relapsed/refractory HL, including chemorefractory patients and those who have failed BV treatment [73, 74].
Unlike conventional chemotherapy, and probably due to the completely novel mechanisms of action, both BV and CPIs lead to response durations which are apparently unrelated to the dur- ation of response to prior chemotherapy treatment lines. This brings particular hope for patients with primary refractory dis- ease, since so far this group has had a much lower likelihood of benefit from treatment than patients with longer duration of remission.
The optimal sequence of BV and CPIs is currently not clear, but ongoing studies are directly comparing BV and CPIs. Even though they are only approved for use as single agents, the com- bination of CPIs with BV has demonstrated impressive activity as well as favourable toxicity in preliminary studies [75, 76].

Evaluation of disease response before HDT and ASCT. Screening for response to salvage treatment is fundamental to patient care and should be carried out with PET-CT. Based on PET-guided evaluation, every effort should be made to increase the propor- tion of chemosensitive patients and to eventually achieve complete metabolic remission using combinations of non-cross- resistant chemotherapy and/or novel drugs [71].
 
ASCT for primary refractory HL. According to retrospective and prospective as well as randomised studies, HDT followed by ASCT can rescue 30%–80% of relapsed/refractory classical HL patients. Refractoriness to first-line chemotherapy is the strongest factor predicting a poor outcome after ASCT. Patients in this category were not included in randomised trials, and autografting resulted in durable progression-free survival (PFS) in 30%–40% – once again supporting the general concept of poorer outcome in chemo- refractory patients compared with chemosensitive patients [IV, B]. Several reports indicate that a dose-increased strategy, includ- ing double transplantation, is a valuable option in patients with high-risk relapsing/refractory HL, taking into account that defi- nitions of high-risk status vary between studies. In 2008, the Groupe d’Etude des Lymphomes de l’Adulte (GELA) and the Socie´te´  Franc¸aise de Greffe de Moelle (SFGM) proposed a risk- adapted strategy in relapsed HL based on the separation of patients into three prognostic groups [77]. Tandem ASCT results suggested a benefit for high-risk patients compared with previous reports of outcomes with single ASCT. Some patients achieved partial or complete remission with their second transplant, and overall outcomes for patients experiencing partial, complete or uncertain complete remission (defined by CT alone) did not dif- fer significantly if the patients had received double transplant- ation [III, B] [77]. This approach has also been tested by other
investigators with similar conclusions [78, 79].

Consolidation therapy after ASCT. The prospective, randomised, placebo-controlled AETHERA trial demonstrated that early con- solidation with BV after ASCT improves PFS in patients with HL at high risk of relapse or progression after ASCT [80]. More than 50% of the patients in both groups in AETHERA were primary refractory HL patients [I, B]. The most recent update of this study showed a hazard ratio of 0.58 (i.e. a 42% reduction in the risk of a PFS event). Median PFS was not reached in the BV arm versus
15.8 months in the placebo arm. Three-year PFS was 61% in the BV arm versus 43% in the placebo arm. Three years after ran- domisation of the last patient, PFS curves for both the BV and placebo arms had reached plateaus, indicating that the effect of BV consolidation is a lasting one and that this treatment may have the potential to eradicate viable residual disease. No differ- ence in OS was observed, perhaps in part reflective of the fact that patients in the placebo arm who progressed were offered treat- ment in a different BV trial [81].

Allogeneic stem cell transplantation (alloSCT) for refractory HL. The prognosis of patients who fail ASCT is poor. A joint European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) and Gruppo Italiano per il Trapianto di Midollo Osseo (GITMO) retrospective analysis of 462 patients who relapsed or progressed after ASCT showed a median time from ASCT to re- lapse of 7 months (range of 1–78 months) and a 5-year OS for the entire cohort of just 32% [82]. Clinical results from retrospective trials of alloSCT reported in the early nineties were disappointing, likely due to the inclusion of heavily pretreated patients who had received extended RT and were allografted in the presence of ac- tive disease after myeloablative conditioning with bone marrow stem cells. However, in the late nineties, the SCT scenario changed substantially with the introduction of reduced intensity conditioning regimens. In fact, several retrospective and
 
prospective phase II clinical trials reported clinically significant reductions in non-relapse mortality to below 30%, resulting in a renewed interest in alloSCT. On average, PFS ranged from 20% to 42% and OS from 25% to 57% [IV, C] [82–86]. The EBMT considers alloSCT as a valid treatment alternative for patients with relapsed HL after ASCT if they have chemosensitive disease and an appropriate stem cell donor [87].
The current availability of active drugs, including BV [68], PD-1 inhibitors [88] and bendamustine [89], has enabled substantially high rates of objective responses in patients who previously failed ASCT, thus resulting in significant improvements in the quality and quantity of clinical responses achieved by patients who become eligible for alloSCT after failed autografting. Interestingly, these treatments share a favourable toxicity profile, thus allowing patients to achieve a good PS at the time of allografting.
AlloSCT could also be a viable option for patients with an in- complete response to salvage chemotherapy, particularly because better results are obtained when this treatment is applied earlier [IV, C] [90]. With conventional agents for induction of remission, the survival of these patients is poor, and most of them die due to disease progression. The availability of novel agents that result in objective responses may eventually mean increased eligibility for alloSCT. On the other hand, long-term follow-up results from the phase II study of BV in relapsed/refractory HL show that among patients reaching a complete remission as best response, 38% were still alive and progression-free at a minimum of 5 years after the last dose of BV. This suggests that BV monotherapy may have cura- tive potential in a subset of patients with relapse post-HDT, even without subsequent alloSCT, which until recently was regarded as the only curative option for HL patients failing HDT [91].
The combination of CPIs and alloSCT is an area of concern, since increased rates of severe graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) have been observed in patients treated with CPIs following alloSCT. However, the increased toxicity may be outweighed by improved efficacy leading to durable remissions [92, 93]. Other studies have shown that remissions induced by CPIs and consoli- dated with alloSCT can be durable in many cases [94]. In order to reduce the risk of GvHD, it is generally recommended to hold CPI treatment a few months before the alloSCT, but this advice is based on biological rationale rather than clinical evidence [94].

RT for relapsed or refractory HL. RT is tolerable in most patients with relapsed or refractory HL, including those with primary re- sistant disease. Even patients with primary resistant disease have a good chance of response to RT [95]. In a study of 56 patients who received salvage RT for relapse post-ASCT, 65% had durable local disease control after 2 years [96]. RT should be considered for patients with primary resistant HL, both as part of induction or as consolidation in patients with localised or bulky disease, and as part of standard palliative treatment of incurable HL.
Recommendation 2.1: For patients with primary resistant HL, there is no evidence to suggest a benefit from treating any differ- ently to other patients with relapsed HL. As such, these patients should be treated the same as other patients with relapsing HL, preferably as part of a clinical trial.
Level of evidence: III
Strength of recommendation: D Consensus: 100% yes (18 voters)
 
Recommendation 2.2: The use of BV and CPIs seem to be par- ticularly beneficial for patients with primary resistant HL who are less likely to benefit from conventional therapies. Consolidation with BV after HDT and ASCT is recommended for patients with primary resistant HL.
Level of evidence: II
Strength of recommendation: B Consensus: No vote obtained
Recommendation 2.3: AlloSCT has a limited role for patients with primary resistant HL but can be considered in selected patients with a good, durable remission and a suitable donor.
Level of evidence: IV
Strength of recommendation: D Consensus: 100% yes (18 voters)

3.	Management of PBL
PBL is a rare and distinct entity classified by the World Health Organization as an aggressive subtype of DLBCL with immuno- blastic and/or plasmablastic morphology, high proliferation rate and immunophenotypic evidence of terminal B-cell differenti- ation. The immunophenotype is positive for CD79a, MUM-1, BLIMP-1, CD38 and CD138, but negative for the B-cell markers CD19, CD20 and PAX-5. MIB-1 is positive in most or all neoplas- tic cells. About 70%–80% of cases express Epstein–Barr virus- encoded RNA (EBER). Among the most frequently detected gen- omic changes are chromosomal translocations involving the MYC gene, usually in association with the immunoglobulin heavy chain, which are detected in half of cases. However, whether MYC translocations represent initiating or late genetic events in PBL pathogenesis is unknown. Gene expression profiling in PBL has shown that it has a transcriptional profile distinct from DLBCL, with differences in activation of B-cell receptor signalling and tar- gets of the transcription factors MYC and MYB [97].
Recommendation 3.1: For human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative patients with suspected PBL, diagnostic assess- ment should include an immunohistochemistry panel of CD38, CD20, PAX5, CD138, EBER, CD30, MUM-1, Kappa-lambda, HHV8 and ALK
Level of evidence: IV
Strength of recommendation: C Consensus: 100% yes (18 voters)
PBL is strongly associated with HIV infection and can also arise in other patients with immunodeficiency states (e.g. organ trans- plant recipients, the elderly), but is also seen in immunocompe- tent individuals. The incidence of HIV-associated PBL accounts for approximately 2% of all acquired immunodeficiency syn- drome-related lymphomas. For immunocompetent patients, the incidence is approximately 0.3% of all non-HL [98]. In a review of 590 patients with PBL [99], 63% were HIV-positive PBL, 28% were HIV-negative PBL, 6% were post-transplant PBL and 3% were transformed PBL. HIV-negative PBL affects female patients in 34% of cases, and the median age at presentation is 55 years. Oral involvement is common (40%), although PBL has a more heterogeneous pattern in terms of sites of involvement in im- munocompetent individuals [100]. Advanced clinical stage,
 
B symptoms and bone marrow involvement are present in 25% of HIV-negative patients with PBL.
The prognosis of patients with PBL is poor. A systematic review of 76 patients with HIV-negative PBL showed a median OS of only 9 months and a 2-year OS rate of 10% [99]. The prognostic value of IPI factors in PBL relies primarily on advanced disease stage and poor PS as indicators of a worse outcome, since age, LDH levels and bone marrow involvement do not appear to affect outcomes in HIV-positive patients [101].
There is no standard of care for patients with PBL. In particular, the use of CHOP is considered inadequate, and some guidelines recommend more intensive regimens such as EPOCH (etoposide/ prednisone/vincristine/cyclophosphamide/hydroxydaunomycin), CODOX-M (cyclophosphamide/vincristine/doxorubicin/metho- trexate)/IVAC (etoposide/ifosfamide/cytarabine) or hyper-CVAD (cyclophosphamide/vincristine/doxorubicin/dexamethasone) [102]. However, several studies of PBL treated with chemotherapy regimens more intensive than CHOP have failed to show a sur- vival benefit [101, 103]. Therefore, PBL should be treated as high- risk DLBCL, but due to the lack of CD20 positivity, treatment with anti-CD20 mAbs is not indicated.
Only few cases of PBL have reported the use of prophylaxis to minimise the risk of CNS involvement. Moreover, there is current- ly no evidence that the use of CNS prophylaxis should be any dif- ferent in PBL compared with other high-risk subtypes of DLBCL.
RT has been used as part of treatment in some PBL cases, but no conclusion can be made from this limited experience, and therefore RT is recommended only in the palliative setting [100].
The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, alone and in combin- ation with chemotherapy, has been used with some degree of effi- cacy in HIV-negative patients with relapsed PBL. In a recent series of three previously untreated patients with PBL (one of whom was HIV-negative), durable responses were achieved with bortezomib combined with dose-adjusted EPOCH [104]. In an- other report, three HIV-positive patients with PBL demonstrated durable remissions following treatment with bortezomib (V)-CHOP, suggesting that this regimen may provide improved efficacy as initial therapy for PBL [105]. However, these encour- aging results are based on anecdotal cases and further cumulative experience is needed.
Recommendation 3.2: HIV-negative patients with PBL should be treated the same as other high-risk subtypes of DLBCL, although rituximab should not be used.
Level of evidence: IV
Strength of recommendation: C Consensus: 100% yes (18 voters)
Recommendation 3.3: Although bortezomib can be safely combined with CHOP, this has not led to improved outcomes and further studies are required.
Level of evidence: V
Strength of recommendation: C Consensus: 100% yes (18 voters)
The role of SCT in patients with PBL has been assessed and it appears that chemotherapy-sensitive PBL patients might benefit from ASCT in first remission. A case series of nine HIV-negative patients with PBL (who responded to chemotherapy) reported encouraging results, with a 5-year OS rate of 60% [106]. The
 
experience with HDT followed by ASCT in the relapsed setting is rather limited. The role of alloSCT is unknown and can only be recommended as a part of a clinical trial.
Recommendation 3.4: HDT-ASCT may play a role in the man- agement of PBL but further studies are required, since available data are from casuistic reports of selected patients.
Level of evidence: IV
Strength of recommendation: D Consensus: 100% yes (18 voters)

 
The authors thank Jennifer Lamarre, Claire Bramley, Matthew Wallace, Aude Galli and all ESMO staff for their support throughout the whole consensus process.
Angela Corstorphine of Kstorfin Medical Communications Ltd provided medical writing support with the preparation of this manuscript. This support was funded by ESMO.


 
All costs relating to the consensus conference were covered from the European Society for Medical Oncology central funds. There was no external funding of the event or manuscript pro- duction. No grant number applies.


 
CB (honoraria from Roche, Pfizer, Celgene, Pharmacyclics and Janssen; research grants from Roche and Janssen), MD (advis- ory boards for Bayer, Celgene, Gilead, Janssen and Pfizer; sup- port for academic trials from Celgene, Janssen, Mundipharma, Pfizer and Roche; speaker’s honoraria from Celgene, Janssen, Mundipharma, Pfizer and Roche), AJMF (advisory boards for Celgene, Gilead and Mundipharma; speaker honoraria from Italfarmaco, Mundipharma and Gilead; research support from Celgene, Roche, Mundipharma and Rhizen), GG (advisory boards for Roche, Janssen, Amgen, Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, Karyopharm and Morphosys; speaker honoraria from Roche, Janssen, Gilead and GlaxoSmithKline), VG (speaker honoraria, advisory boards, consultancy and travel grants from Roche; speaker honoraria from Mundipharma, GlaxoSmithKline and Bristol-Myers Squibb), MH (speaker honoraria, advisory boards and consultancy from Takeda; advisory boards and consultancy from Janssen, Celgene and Roche/Genentech), ML (honoraria from Celgene, Janssen-Cilag, Roche, Amgen, Mundipharma and Teva; research contracts with Celgene, Pfizer, Mundipharma and Roche; research grants from Amgen, Roche and Takeda), SLG (speaker honoraria, advisory boards, consultancy and travel grants from Roche, Janssen-Cilag and Celgene; research pro- gramme funding from Roche, Janssen and Servier), UM (hono- raria for advisory board activities from Roche, Celgene, Amgen and Janssen-Cilag; research grants from Mundipharma and Celgene), PdNB (speaker’s bureau/lectures for Roche and Bayer), MP (advisory boards for Celgene, Roche and Spectrum; research support from Amgen, Roche and Spectrum), NS (travel grants, advisory boards and research support from Roche; travel
 
grants and advisory boards from Celgene; travel grants and hon- oraria for company symposia from Riemser Pharma and CTI Life Sciences), PS (advisory boards for Celgene and Teva; hono- raria from Spectrum Pharmaceuticals and Pierre Fabre Oncology; travel grants from Hospira, Celgene and Teva), MS (speaker’s bureau and advisory boards for Teva, Mundipharma, Janssen-Cilag, Gilead, CTI BioPharma and Servier; research support, consultant, speaker’s bureau and advisory boards for Menarini; speaker’s bureau for Roche and Takeda), RS (research support from Celgene, Novartis and Teva; honoraria from Celgene, Novartis and Teva; scientific advisory board for Celgene), ASB (consultancy fees from Takeda), MT (consult- ancy for Roche, Gilead, Janssen, Takeda and Celgene), JW [ad- visory boards for Roche, Celgene, Janssen-Cilag, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Takeda; research grants (for the institution) from Roche, Celgene, Janssen-Cilag, Takeda, GlaxoSmithKline/ Novartis and Seattle Genetics; lecture honoraria from Roche, Janssen-Cilag, Servier, Takeda and Celgene], UW (speaker hon- oraria from Amgen, Novartis, Roche and Chugai), EZ [advisory honoraria and/or support for investigator-initiated studies (for the institution) from Celgene, Johnson and Johnson/Janssen, Gilead, Mundipharma, Roche and Bayer]. All remaining authors have declared no conflicts of interest.

 
1.	Tilly H, Gomes da Silva M, Vitolo U et al. Diffuse large B-cell lymph- oma (DLBCL): ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treat- ment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2015; 26 (Suppl 5): v116–v125.
2.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
3.	d’Amore F, Gaulard P, Tru¨mper L et al. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow- up. Ann Oncol 2015; 26 (Suppl 5): v108–v115.
4.	Eichenauer DA, Aleman BMP, Andre´ M et al. Hodgkin lymphoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow- up. Ann Oncol 2018; doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdy080.
5.	Willemze R, Hodak E, Zinzani PL et al. Primary cutaneous lymphomas: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow- up. Ann Oncol 2018; 29(Suppl 4): iv30–iv40.
6.	Zucca E, Copie-Bergman C, Ricardi U et al. Gastric marginal zone lymphoma of MALT type: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diag- nosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2013; 24 (Suppl 6): vi144–vi148.
7.	Dreyling M, Campo E, Hermine O et al. Newly diagnosed and relapsed mantle cell lymphoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagno- sis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2017; 28 (Suppl 4): iv62–iv71.
8.	Dreyling M, Ghielmini M, Rule S et al. Newly diagnosed and relapsed fol- licular lymphoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2017; 28 (Suppl 4): iv62–iv71.
9.	MacKintosh FR, Colby TV, Podolsky WJ et al. Central nervous system involvement in non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: an analysis of 105 cases. Cancer 1982; 49: 586–595.
10.	van Besien K, Ha CS, Murphy S et al. Risk factors, treatment, and out- come of central nervous system recurrence in adults with intermediate- grade and immunoblastic lymphoma. Blood 1998; 91: 1178–1184.
11.	Johnson GJ, Oken MM, Anderson JR et al. Central nervous system re- lapse in unfavourable-histology non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: is prophy- laxis indicated? Lancet 1984; 2: 685–687.
12.	Boehme V, Schmitz N, Zeynalova S et al. CNS events in elderly patients with aggressive lymphoma treated with modern chemotherapy (CHOP- 14) with or without rituximab: an analysis of patients treated in the
 
RICOVER-60 trial of the German High-Grade Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Study Group (DSHNHL). Blood 2009; 113: 3896–3902.
13.	Feugier P, Virion JM, Tilly H et al. Incidence and risk factors for central nervous system occurrence in elderly patients with diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma: influence of rituximab. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 129–133.
14.	Schmitz N, Zeynalova S, Glass B et al. CNS disease in younger patients with aggressive B-cell lymphoma: an analysis of patients treated on the Mabthera International Trial and trials of the German High-Grade Non- Hodgkin Lymphoma Study Group. Ann Oncol 2012; 23: 1267–1273.
15.	Chihara D, Oki Y, Matsuo K et al. Incidence and risk factors for central nervous system relapse in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: analyses with competing risk regression model. Leuk Lymphoma 2011; 52: 2270–2275.
16.	Guirguis HR, Cheung MC, Mahrous M et al. Impact of central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis on the incidence and risk factors for CNS re- lapse in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated in the ritux- imab era: a single centre experience and review of the literature. Br J Haematol 2012; 159: 39–49.
17.	Shimazu Y, Notohara K, Ueda Y. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with central nervous system relapse: prognosis and risk factors according to retrospective analysis from a single-center experience. Int J Hematol 2009; 89: 577–583.
18.	Tai WM, Chung J, Tang PL et al. Central nervous system (CNS) relapse in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL): pre- and post-rituximab. Ann Hematol 2011; 90: 809–818.
19.	Villa D, Connors JM, Shenkier TN et al. Incidence and risk factors for central nervous system relapse in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: the impact of the addition of rituximab to CHOP chemo- therapy. Ann Oncol 2010; 21: 1046–1052.
20.	Yamamoto W, Tomita N, Watanabe R et al. Central nervous system in- volvement in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Eur J Haematol 2010; 85: 6–10.
21.	Tomita N, Yokoyama M, Yamamoto W et al. Central nervous system event in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in the rituximab era. Cancer Sci 2012; 103: 245–251.
22.	Schmitz N, Zeynalova S, Nickelsen M et al. CNS International Prognostic Index: a risk model for CNS relapse in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with R-CHOP. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 3150–3156.
23.	El-Galaly TC, Cheah CY, Villa D et al. Validation of the German high- grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma study group (DSHNHL) prognostic model for CNS relapse in a large cohort of PET/CT staged patients. Hematol Oncol 2015; 33 (Suppl 1): 171–172.
24.	Aukema SM, Siebert R, Schuuring E et al. Double-hit B-cell lympho- mas. Blood 2011; 117: 2319–2331.
25.	Savage KJ, Johnson NA, Ben-Neriah S et al. MYC gene rearrangements are associated with a poor prognosis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients treated with R-CHOP chemotherapy. Blood 2009; 114: 3533–3537.
26.	Savage KJ, Slack GW, Mottok A et al. Impact of dual expression of MYC and BCL2 by immunohistochemistry on the risk of CNS relapse in DLBCL. Blood 2016; 127: 2182–2188.
27.	Oki Y, Noorani M, Lin P et al. Double hit lymphoma: the MD Anderson Cancer Center clinical experience. Br J Haematol 2014; 166: 891–901.
28.	Arkenau HT, Chong G, Cunningham D et al. The role of intrathecal chemotherapy prophylaxis in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymph- oma. Ann Oncol 2006; 18: 541–545.
29.	Tomita N, Takasaki H, Ishiyama Y et al. Intrathecal methotrexate prophy- laxis and central nervous system relapse in patients with diffuse large B- cell lymphoma following rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone. Leuk Lymphoma 2015; 56: 725–729.
30.	Dietrich PY. Intrathecal MTX for DLBCL: from an inappropriate prophylactic tradition to a medical error? Blood 2009; 114: 1999.
31.	Schmitz N, Zeynalova S, Loeffler M, Pfreundschuh M. Response: intra- thecal methotrexate and central nervous system events. Blood 2009; 114: 1999–2000.
 
32.	Vitolo U, Chiappella A, Ferreri AJ et al. First-line treatment for primary testicular diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with rituximab-CHOP, CNS prophylaxis, and contralateral testis irradiation: final results of an inter- national phase II trial. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 2766–2772.
33.	Tilly H, Lepage E, Coiffier B et al. Intensive conventional chemotherapy (ACVBP regimen) compared with standard CHOP for poor-prognosis aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2003; 102: 4284–4289.
34.	Re´cher  C,  Coiffier  B,  Haioun  C  et  al.  Intensified  chemotherapy  with ACVBP plus rituximab versus standard CHOP plus rituximab for the treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (LNH03-2B): an open-label randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet 2011; 378: 1858–1867.
35.	Abramson JS, Hellmann M, Barnes JA et al. Intravenous methotrexate as central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis is associated with a low risk of CNS recurrence in high-risk patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Cancer 2010; 116: 4283–4290.
36.	Holte H, Leppa¨ S, Bjo¨rkholm M et al. Dose-densified chemoimmuno- therapy followed by systemic central nervous system prophylaxis for younger high-risk diffuse large B-cell/follicular grade 3 lymphoma patients: results of a phase II Nordic Lymphoma Group study. Ann Oncol 2013; 24: 1385–1392.
37.	Chin CK, Cheah CY. How I treat patients with aggressive lymphoma at high risk of CNS relapse. Blood 2017; 130: 867–874.
38.	Omuro A, Correa DD, DeAngelis LM et al. R-MPV followed by high- dose chemotherapy with TBC and autologous stem-cell transplant for newly diagnosed primary CNS lymphoma. Blood 2015; 125: 1403–1410.
39.	Pfreundschuh M. How I treat elderly patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Blood 2010; 116: 5103–5110.
40.	O’Neill BP, O’Fallon JR, Earle JD et al. Primary central nervous system non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: survival advantages with combined initial therapy? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995; 33: 663–673.
41.	Schultz C, Scott C, Sherman W et al. Preirradiation chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and dexamethasone for primary CNS lymphomas: initial report of radiation therapy oncology group protocol 88-06. J Clin Oncol 1996; 14: 556–564.
42.	DeAngelis LM, Yahalom J, Thaler HT, Kher U. Combined modality therapy for primary CNS lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 1992; 10: 635–643.
43.	Ferreri AJ, Reni M, Foppoli M et al. High-dose cytarabine plus high- dose methotrexate versus high-dose methotrexate alone in patients with primary CNS lymphoma: a randomised phase 2 trial. Lancet 2009; 374: 1512–1520.
44.	Korfel A, Elter T, Thiel E et al. Phase II study of central nervous system (CNS)-directed chemotherapy including high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell transplantation for CNS relapse of aggressive lym- phomas. Haematologica 2013; 98: 364–370.
45.	Soussain C, Hoang-Xuan K, Taillandier L et al. Intensive chemotherapy followed by hematopoietic stem-cell rescue for refractory and recurrent primary CNS and intraocular lymphoma: Socie´te´ Franc¸aise de Greffe de Moe¨lle Osseuse-The´rapie Cellulaire. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 2512–2518.
46.	Doorduyn JK, van Imhoff GW, van Montfort KCAGM et al. Treatment of secondary central nervous system lymphoma with intrathecal rituxi- mab, high dose methotrexate and R-DHAP, followed by autologous stem cell transplantation. A Phase II HOVON Study. Blood 2012; 120: abstract 306.
47.	Illerhaus G, Mu¨ller F, Feuerhake F et al. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem-cell transplantation without consolidating radiother- apy as first-line treatment for primary lymphoma of the central nervous system. Haematologica 2008; 93: 147–148.
48.	Ferreri AJ, Cwynarski K, Pulczynski E et al. Chemoimmunotherapy with methotrexate, cytarabine, thiotepa, and rituximab (MATRix regi- men) in patients with primary CNS lymphoma: results of the first ran- domisation of the International Extranodal Lymphoma Study Group- 32 (IELSG32) phase 2 trial. Lancet Haematol 2016; 3: e217–e227.
49.	Ferreri AJ, Donadoni G, Cabras MG et al. High doses of antimetabolites followed by high-dose sequential chemoimmunotherapy and autolo- gous stem-cell transplantation in patients with systemic B-cell lymph- oma and secondary CNS involvement: final results of a multicenter phase II trial. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 3903–3910.
 
50.	Ghesquieres H, Houillier C, Chinot O et al. Rituximab-lenalidomide (REVRI) in relapse or refractory primary central nervous system (PCNSL) or vitreo retinal lymphoma (PVRL): results of a “proof of concept” phase II study of the French LOC network. Blood 2016; 128: 785.
51.	Choquet S, Houillier C, Bijou F et al. Ibrutinib monotherapy in relapse or refractory primary CNS lymphoma (PCNSL) and primary vitreo- retinal lymphoma (PVRL). Result of the interim analysis of the iLOC phase II study from the Lysa and the French LOC network. Blood 2016; 128: 784.
52.	Nayak L, Iwamoto FM, LaCasce A et al. PD-1 blockade with nivolumab in relapsed/refractory primary central nervous system and testicular lymphoma. Blood 2017; 129: 3071–3073.
53.	Borchmann P, Eichenauer DA, Engert A. State of the art in the treat- ment of Hodgkin lymphoma. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2012; 9: 450–459.
54.	Diehl V, Franklin J, Pfreundschuh M et al. Standard and increased-dose BEACOPP chemotherapy compared with COPP-ABVD for advanced Hodgkin’s disease. N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 2386–2395.
55.	Josting A, Mu¨ller H, Borchmann P et al. Dose intensity of chemother- apy in patients with relapsed Hodgkin’s lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 5074–5080.
56.	Majhail NS, Weisdorf DJ, Defor TE et al. Long-term results of autolo- gous stem cell transplantation for primary refractory or relapsed Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2006; 12: 1065–1072.
57.	Arai S, Fanale M, DeVos S et al. Defining a Hodgkin lymphoma popula- tion for novel therapeutics after relapse from autologous hematopoietic cell transplant. Leuk Lymphoma 2013; 54: 2531–2533.
58.	Moskowitz AJ, Perales MA, Kewalramani T et al. Outcomes for patients who fail high dose chemoradiotherapy and autologous stem cell rescue for relapsed and primary refractory Hodgkin lymphoma. Br J Haematol 2009; 146: 158–163.
59.	Brice P, Bastion Y, Divine M et al. Analysis of prognostic factors after the first relapse of Hodgkin’s disease in 187 patients. Cancer 1996; 78: 1293–1299.
60.	Greaves P, Wilson A, Matthews J et al. Early relapse and refractory dis- ease remain risk factors in the anthracycline and autologous transplant era for patients with relapsed/refractory classical Hodgkin lymphoma: a single centre intention-to-treat analysis. Br J Haematol 2012; 157: 201–204.
61.	Andre´ M, Henry-Amar M, Pico JL et al. Comparison of high-dose ther- apy and autologous stem-cell transplantation with conventional therapy for  Hodgkin’s  disease  induction  failure:  a  case-control  study.  Socie´te´ Franc¸aise de Greffe de Moelle. J Clin Oncol 1999; 17: 222–229.
62.	Ferme´ C, Mounier N, Divine´ M et al. Intensive salvage therapy with high-dose chemotherapy for patients with advanced Hodgkin’s disease in relapse or failure after initial chemotherapy: results of the Groupe d’Etudes des Lymphomes de l’Adulte H89 Trial. J Clin Oncol 2002; 20: 467–475.
63.	Josting A, Rueffer U, Franklin J et al. Prognostic factors and treatment outcome in primary progressive Hodgkin lymphoma: a report from the German Hodgkin Lymphoma Study Group. Blood 2000; 96: 1280–1286.
64.	Morabito F, Stelitano C, Luminari S et al. The role of high-dose therapy and autologous stem cell transplantation in patients with primary re- fractory Hodgkin’s lymphoma: a report from the Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio dei Linfomi (GISL). Bone Marrow Transplant 2006; 37: 283–288.
65.	Cheson BD, Fisher RI, Barrington SF et al. Recommendations for initial evaluation, staging, and response assessment of Hodgkin and non- Hodgkin lymphoma: the Lugano classification. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 3059–3068.
66.	Kuruvilla J, Keating A, Crump M. How I treat relapsed and refractory Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2011; 117: 4208–4217.
67.	Moskowitz AJ, Hamlin PA, Jr., Perales MA et al. Phase II study of bend- amustine in relapsed and refractory Hodgkin lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 456–460.
 
68.	Younes A, Gopal AK, Smith SE et al. Results of a pivotal phase II study of brentuximab vedotin for patients with relapsed or refractory Hodgkin’s lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 2183–2189.
69.	Garcia-Sanz R, Sureda A, Gonzalez AP et al. Brentuximab vedotin plus ESHAP (BRESHAP) is a highly effective combination for inducing re- mission in refractory and relapsed Hodgkin lymphoma patients prior to autologous stem cell transplant: a trial of the Spanish group of lymph- oma and bone marrow transplantation (GELTAMO). Blood 2016; 128: 1109.
70.	Hagenbeek A, Zijlstra JM, Lugtenburg P et al. Transplant BRaVE: com- bining brentuximab vedotin with DHAP as salvage treatment in relapsed/refractory Hodgkin lymphoma. A phase 1 dose-escalation study. Haematologica 2016; 101 (Suppl 5): 44. abstr T024.
71.	Moskowitz AJ, Scho¨der H, Yahalom J et al. PET-adapted sequential sal- vage therapy with brentuximab vedotin followed by augmented ifosa- mide, carboplatin, and etoposide for patients with relapsed and refractory Hodgkin’s lymphoma: a non-randomised, open-label, single- centre, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 284–292.
72.	LaCasce AS, Bociek G, Sawas A et al. Brentuximab vedotin plus benda- mustine: a highly active salvage treatment regimen for patients with relapsed or refractory Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2015; 126: 3982.
73.	Younes A, Santoro A, Shipp M et al. Nivolumab for classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma after failure of both autologous stem-cell transplantation and brentuximab vedotin: a multicentre, multicohort, single-arm phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17: 1283–1294.
74.	Armand P, Shipp MA, Ribrag V et al. Programmed death-1 blockade with pembrolizumab in patients with classical Hodgkin lymphoma after brentuximab vedotin failure. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34: 3733–3739.
75.	Diefenbach CS, Hong F, David KA et al. Title: a phase I study with an expansion cohort of the combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab and brentuximab vedotin in patients with relapsed/refractory Hodgkin lymphoma: a trial of the ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group (E4412 Arms D and E). Blood 2016; 128: 1106.
76.	Herrera AF, Moskowitz AJ, Bartlett NL et al. Interim results of brentuxi- mab vedotin in combination with nivolumab in patients with relapsed or refractory Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2018; 131: 1183–1194.
77.	Morschhauser F, Brice P, Ferme´ C et al. Risk-adapted salvage treatment with single or tandem autologous stem-cell transplantation for first re- lapse/refractory Hodgkin’s lymphoma: results of the prospective multi- center H96 trial by the GELA/SFGM study group. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 5980–5987.
78.	Fung HC, Stiff P, Schriber J et al. Tandem autologous stem cell trans- plantation for patients with primary refractory or poor risk recurrent Hodgkin lymphoma. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2007; 13: 594–600.
79.	Moskowitz CH, Yahalom J, Zelenetz AD et al. High-dose chemo- radiotherapy for relapsed or refractory Hodgkin lymphoma and the sig- nificance of pre-transplant functional imaging. Br J Haematol 2010; 148: 890–897.
80.	Moskowitz CH, Nademanee A, Masszi T et al. Brentuximab vedotin as consolidation therapy after autologous stem-cell transplantation in patients with Hodgkin’s lymphoma at risk of relapse or progression (AETHERA): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2015; 385: 1853–1862.
81.	Sweetenham J, Walewski J, Nademanee AP et al. Updated efficacy and safety data from the AETHERA trial of consolidation with brentuximab vedotin after autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT) in Hodgkin lymphoma patients at high risk of relapse. Blood 2015; 126: 3172.
82.	Peggs KS, Hunter A, Chopra R et al. Clinical evidence of a graft-versus- Hodgkin’s-lymphoma effect after reduced-intensity allogeneic trans- plantation. Lancet 2005; 365: 1934–1941.
83.	Alvarez I, Sureda A, Caballero MD et al. Nonmyeloablative stem cell transplantation is an effective therapy for refractory or relapsed Hodgkin lymphoma: results of a Spanish prospective cooperative protocol. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2006; 12: 172–183.
84.	Anderlini P, Saliba R, Acholonu S et al. Fludarabine-melphalan as a pre- parative regimen for reduced-intensity conditioning allogeneic stem cell transplantation in relapsed and refractory Hodgkin’s lymphoma:
 
the updated M.D. Anderson Cancer Center experience. Haematologica 2008; 93: 257–264.
85.	Devetten MP, Hari PN, Carreras J et al. Unrelated donor reduced- intensity allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for relapsed and refractory Hodgkin lymphoma. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2009; 15: 109–117.
86.	Sureda A, Canals C, Arranz R et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation after reduced intensity conditioning in patients with relapsed or refractory Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Results of the HDR-ALLO study – a prospective clinical trial by the Grupo Espan~ol de Linfomas/Trasplante de Me´dula Osea (GEL/TAMO) and the Lymphoma Working Party of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Haematologica 2012; 97: 310–317.
87.	Sureda A, Bader P, Cesaro S et al. Indications for allo- and auto-SCT for haematological diseases, solid tumours and immune disorders: current practice in Europe, 2015. Bone Marrow Transplant 2015; 50: 1037–1056.
88.	Ansell SM, Lesokhin AM, Borrello I et al. PD-1 blockade with nivolu- mab in relapsed or refractory Hodgkin’s lymphoma. N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 311–319.
89.	Anastasia A, Carlo-Stella C, Corradini P et al. Bendamustine for Hodgkin lymphoma patients failing autologous or autologous and allo- geneic stem cell transplantation: a retrospective study of the Fondazione Italiana Linfomi. Br J Haematol 2014; 166: 140–142.
90.	Thomson KJ, Kayani I, Ardeshna K et al. A response-adjusted PET- based transplantation strategy in primary resistant and relapsed Hodgkin Lymphoma. Leukemia 2013; 27: 1419–1422.
91.	Chen R, Gopal AK, Smith SE et al. Five-year survival and durability results of brentuximab vedotin in patients with relapsed or refractory Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2016; 128: 1562–1566.
92.	Herbaux C, Gauthier J, Brice P et al. Efficacy and tolerability of nivolu- mab after allogeneic transplantation for relapsed Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2017; 129: 2471–2478.
93.	Haverkos BM, Abbott D, Hamadani M et al. PD-1 blockade for relapsed lymphoma post-allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant: high response rate but frequent GVHD. Blood 2017; 130: 221–228.
94.	Merryman RW, Kim HT, Zinzani PL et al. Safety and efficacy of allo- geneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant after PD-1 blockade in relapsed/refractory lymphoma. Blood 2017; 129: 1380–1388.
95.	Specht L, Yahalom J, Illidge T et al. Modern radiation therapy for Hodgkin lymphoma: field and dose guidelines from the international lymphoma radiation oncology group (ILROG). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2014; 89: 854–862.
96.	Goda JS, Massey C, Kuruvilla J et al. Role of salvage radiation therapy for patients with relapsed or refractory Hodgkin lymphoma who failed autolo- gous stem cell transplant. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2012; 84: e329–e335.
97.	Chapman J, Gentles AJ, Sujoy V et al. Gene expression analysis of plas- mablastic lymphoma identifies downregulation of B-cell receptor sig- naling and additional unique transcriptional programs. Leukemia 2015; 29: 2270–2273.
98.	Arboe B, El-Galaly TC, Clausen MR et al. The Danish National Lymphoma Registry: coverage and data quality. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0157999.
99.	Castillo J, Pantanowitz L, Dezube BJ. HIV-associated plasmablastic lymphoma: lessons learned from 112 published cases. Am J Hematol 2008; 83: 804–809.
100.	Castillo JJ, Bibas M, Miranda RN. The biology and treatment of plasma- blastic lymphoma. Blood 2015; 125: 2323–2330.
101.	Castillo  JJ,  Furman  M,  Beltra´n  BE  et  al.  Human  immunodeficiency virus-associated plasmablastic lymphoma: poor prognosis in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. Cancer 2012; 118: 5270–5277.
102.	NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology version 5.2017. AIDS- Related B-Cell Lymphomas. 2015; https://www.nccn.org/professionals/ physician_gls/pdf/b-cell.pdf (29 September 2017, date last accessed).
103.	Loghavi S, Alayed K, Aladily TN et al. Stage, age, and EBV status impact outcomes of plasmablastic lymphoma patients: a clinicopathologic ana- lysis of 61 patients. J Hematol Oncol 2015; 8: 65.
104.	Castillo JJ, Reagan JL, Sikov WM, Winer ES. Bortezomib in comfu- sional dose-adjusted EPOCH for the treatment of plasmablastic lymph- oma. Br J Haematol 2015; 169: 352–355.
 
105.	Fernandez-Alvarez R, Gonzalez-Rodriguez AP, Rubio-Castro A et al. Bortezomib plus CHOP for the treatment of HIV-associated plasma- blastic lymphoma: clinical experience in three patients. Leuk Lymphoma 2016; 57: 463–466.
106.	Liu JJ, Zhang L, Ayala E et al. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)- negative plasmablastic lymphoma: a single institutional experience and literature review. Leuk Res 2011; 35: 1571–1577.
 
107.	Ferreri AJ, Bruno-Ventre M, Donadoni G et al. Risk-tailored CNS prophylaxis in a mono-institutional series of 200 patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated in the rituximab era. Br J Haematol 2015; 168: 654–662.
108.	Kumar A, Vanderplas A, LaCasce AS et al. Lack of benefit of central ner- vous system prophylaxis for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in the rituximab era: findings from a large national database. Cancer 2012; 118: 2944–2951.
 
 
 
ESMO Lymphoma Consensus Conference Panel Members

Christian Buske, Comprehensive Cancer Center Ulm and Department of Internal Medicine III, Institute of Experimental Cancer Research, University Hospital, Ulm, Germany; Martin Dreyling,   Medizinische   Klinik   III,   Klinikum   der   Universita¨t Mu¨nchen/LMU, Munich, Germany; Andre´s J.M. Ferreri, Unit of Lymphoid Malignanciegy, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; Paul Fields, Department of Haematology, Guys and St Thomas’ and King’s College Hospitals, London, United Kingdom; Gianluca Gaidano, Division of Hematology, Department of Translational Medicine, Amedeo Avogadro University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy; Valentin Goede, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Cologne, Germany; Martin Hutchings, Department of Haematology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; Marco Ladetto, Hematology Division, Azienda Ospedaliera Santi Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy; Steven Le Gouill, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire de Nantes, UMR892 team 10, CIC Nantes, France; Stefano Luminari, Hematology, Arcispedale
S. Maria Nuova, IRCCS Reggio Emilia, and Department of Diagnostic, Clinical and Public Health Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy; Ulrich Mey, Department   of   Oncology and   Haematology,   Kantonsspital
 
Graubu¨nden,    Chur,    Switzerland;    Peter    de    Nully    Brown, Department of Haematology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; Michael Pfreundschuh, Innere Medizin I, University Klinik des Saarlandes, Hamburg, Germany; Christiane Pott, Second Medical Department, University Hospital Schleswig- Holstein, Kiel, Germany; Norbert Schmitz, Department of Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Asklepios Klinik St. Georg, Hamburg, Germany; Pierre Soubeyran, Department     of     Medical     Oncology,     Institut     Bergonie´, Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Bordeaux, France; Michele Spina, Division of Medical Oncology A, National Cancer Institute, Aviano, Italy; Reinhard Stauder, Haematology and Oncology Department, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria; Anna Sureda Balari, Servei d’Hematologia, Institut Catala` d’Oncologia – Hospital Duran i Reynals, Barcelona, Spain; Marek Trnˇen´y, Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Ist Dept Medicine, 1st Fac Medicine, Charles University, General Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic; Gustaaf van Imhoff, Section of Hematology, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands; Jan Walewski, Department of Lymphoid Malignancies, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Centre and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland; Ulrich Wedding, Department of Palliative Care, University Hospital, Jena, Germany; Alberto Zamo`, Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona, Verona, Italy; Emanuele Zucca, Lymphoma Unit, Oncology Institute of Southern Switzerland, Ospedale San Giovanni, Bellinzona, Switzerland.
