




 SPECIAL ARTICLE	

Marginal zone lymphomas: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up✰
E. Zucca1,2,3, L. Arcaini4,5, C. Buske6, P. W. Johnson7, M. Ponzoni8, M. Raderer9, U. Ricardi10, A. Salar11, K. Stamatopoulos12,
C. Thieblemont13, A. Wotherspoon14 & M. Ladetto15, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Division of Medical Oncology, Oncology Institute of Southern Switzerland, Bellinzona; 2Department of Medical Oncology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern; 3Institute of Oncology Research, Bellinzona, Switzerland; 4Division of Hematology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia; 5Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy; 6Comprehensive Cancer Centre, University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, Germany; 7Cancer Research UK Centre, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, UK; 8Vita-Salute San Raffaele University and Pathology Unit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; 9Internal Medicine I, Division of Oncology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 10Department of Oncology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy; 11Department of Hematology, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 12Institute of Applied Biosciences, CERTH, the Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Thessaloniki, Greece; 13Department of Hematology, APHP-Saint-Louis Hospital, University Paris-Diderot, Paris, France; 14Department of Histopathology, The Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK; 15Division of Hematology, Azienda Ospedaliera SS. Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy



 

In the last update of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification, the marginal zone B-cell lymphomas (MZLs) comprise extranodal MZL (EMZL) of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), also known as MALT lymphoma, splenic MZL (SMZL) with or without villous lymphocytes and nodal MZL (NMZL) with or without monocytoid B cells. These are three distinct clinical entities with specific diagnostic criteria and different genetic features, clinical behaviour and therapeutic implications.1e3 The onset of an overt MZL, particularly of SMZL, may be preceded by the appearance of clonal B cells in the blood, a condition recently described as clonal B-cell lymphocytosis of marginal zone origin (CBL-MZ).4

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
MZLs represent approximately 5%e15% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas in the Western world. EMZLs comprise approxi- mately two-thirds and can arise at any extranodal site, usu- ally in the context of chronic antigenic stimulation due either to infections or autoimmune disorders. The stomach is the most common site, followed by ocular adnexa, lung and salivary glands. SMZL accounts for w20% and NMZL for
<10% of cases. Aetiological heterogeneity is apparent across the anatomical sites, probably inﬂuenced by either intrinsic genetic/molecular characteristics or geographical factors and

 
*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
✰	Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: December 2006, last update July 2019. This publication supersedes the previously published versiondAnn Oncol. 2013;24(suppl. 6):vi144-vi148.
0923-7534/© 2019 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 

environmental exposures. Overall, the incidence appears to have increased in the last two decades (possibly because of improved pathological diagnosis), despite a decline in the incidence of Helicobacter pylori-associated gastric MZLs.5

DIAGNOSIS AND PATHOLOGY/MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
The diagnosis should follow the current 2017 WHO classi- fication and requires an adequate tumour biopsy [IV, A]. The typical (centrocyte-like) marginal zone B cells have small- to medium-sized, slightly irregular nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli, moderately dispersed chromatin and pale cyto- plasm. The accumulation of abundant pale-staining cyto- plasm may lead to a monocytoid appearance.3 Differential diagnosis from mimics of MZL mainly depends upon immunohistochemistry (IHC), including at least CD20, CD10, CD5, CD23, cyclin D1, immunoglobulin (Ig) D and SOX-11 [IV, B] (Table 1). It is recommended that diagnostic and follow- up biopsies of MZL should be reviewed and confirmed by an expert haematopathologist.6 Although there are no entirely definitive criteria, a diagnosis of evolution to large B-cell
lymphoma should be made when there are clearly sepa- rated sheets of large cells comprising >20% of the neoplastic population [V, B].

CBL-MZ
This condition is defined by the presence of circulating clonal B cells with phenotypic features consistent with a marginal zone origin in the absence of splenomegaly, he- patomegaly, lymphadenopathy or other symptoms and signs suggestive of an established lymphoma. Unlike chronic
 

 

Table 1. Immunohistochemical and molecular markers in MZL
Molecule	Type of test	Expected result	Level of recommendation
CD20	IHC	Positive	Mandatory
CD5	IHC	Negativea
Mandatory
CD23	IHC	Negative/positive	Suggestedb
CD10	IHC	Negative	Mandatory
IgD	IHC	Negativec
Suggested
Cyclin D1	IHC	Negative	Mandatoryd
MYD88 mutation	PCR	Negative	Suggestede
IgD, immunoglobulin D; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LPL, lymphoplasmacytic lym- phoma; MZL, marginal zone lymphoma; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SMZL, splenic marginal zone lymphoma.
a Few exceptions may occur.
b In cases with small cell morphology, irrespectively of CD5-concurrent positivity.
c In cases with splenomegaly, as it is usually positive in SMZL.
d In cases positive for CD5.
e When present, a differential diagnostic problem with LPL arises (cases of MZL with
MYD88 mutation may represent rare exceptions).

 


lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL)-like monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL) which may precede the development of CLL, there is no defined cut-off in the clonal B-cell lymphocyte count for discriminating CBL-MZ from MZL. Only a minority (15%e20%) of patients will eventually progress to an overt lymphoma, most often an SMZL.4

EMZL
Lymphoepithelial lesions are neither essential for the diagnosis of EMZL nor absolutely specific for this entity, as they can be seen in some reactive conditions as well as in other lymphoma subtypes.
In gastric MZL, if the presence of active H. pylori infection is not demonstrated by (immuno)histochemistry, it must be ruled out by serology, urea breath test and/or stool antigen test.7
In addition to routine histology and IHC, ﬂuorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) studies for detection of t(11;18)(p21;p21) may be useful for identifying gastric MZL patients who are unlikely to respond to antibiotic therapy [III, B].5

SMZL
In most instances, the diagnosis of splenic small B-cell lymphomas of marginal origin, usually SMZL, can be established without a splenectomy specimen, through a combination of peripheral blood/bone marrow aspirate morphology and ﬂow cytometry, as well as bone marrow biopsy histology and IHC, reviewed by expert haematopa- thologists/haematologists [IV, B].2,8,9 However, the accuracy and reproducibility of this approach have not yet been fully investigated. In a minority of cases, the definitive diagnosis may not be possible without splenectomy. The same holds for the definitive differential diagnosis between SMZL and splenic diffuse red pulp lymphoma, as they share similar features in the peripheral blood and bone marrow.10,11 Neoplastic lymphocytes in SMZL often display villi; howev- er, these are not seen in all cases (sometimes for technical reasons) and not every lymphoma displaying villi corre- sponds to SMZL.2
 
NMZL
NMZL shares morphological and immunophenotypic simi- larities with other MZLs, and its differential diagnosis from other indolent lymphomas can be particularly difficult, un- less so-called ‘monocytoid B-cell morphology’ is prominent. A small monoclonal component, usually IgM, may be detected and, in such cases, differential diagnosis from lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL) may be necessary. Since MYD88 gene mutations are detected in the large majority of LPLs, this molecular aberration may be used for diagnostic purposes, with the knowledge that MZLs rarely harbour MYD88 mutations.12
In all cases, but particularly for NMZL, the histopatho- logical diagnosis must be established with full knowledge of the clinical and radiological presentation [IV, A].
NMZL is also seen in children. Notably, paediatric NMZL has distinct morphological and clinical characteristics. It is much more common in boys, usually presents as asymp- tomatic and localised disease and has a much better prognosis than adult-onset cases.1

STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Initial work-up
Mandatory initial staging for all MZL subtypes should include:
history and physical examination, noting lymph node re- gions, eyes and ears, nose and throat, liver and spleen; full blood and differential counts, with ﬂow cytometry of peripheral blood mandatory in NMZL and SMZL and optional in EMZL;
biochemistry, including renal and liver function tests; protein electrophoresis;
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and b2 microglobulin
(B2M);
optional direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test in SMZL; serum and urine immunofixation;
serology for hepatitis C virus (HCV) [if positive, including HCV-RNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test and virus genotyping];
cryoglobulins and cryocrit if HCV-positive;
hepatitis B virus (HBV) markers and human immunode-
ficiency virus (HIV) serology.

Bone marrow aspirate (with morphology and ﬂow cytometry) and biopsy are mandatory in NMZL and SMZL and highly recommended in EMZL, particularly in non- gastric lymphoma and when only local treatment is planned.
Imaging should include complete chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan [or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)] and imaging of the orbits and salivary glands [IV, B].
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning has generally been considered of little clinical utility; however, this is now being reconsidered as a result of the increased sensitivity of modern PET-CT equipment. It may be useful in
 

 
cases when only localised treatment is planned. PET scan- ning should also be considered when clinical and/or labo- ratory data suggest transformation to high-grade histology and to guide decisions on which lymph node to target for biopsy [IV, B].
Endoscopic ultrasound (US) for gastric MZL can be used to define gastric wall infiltration and perigastric lymph node involvement.
EMZL. EMZL usually remains localised for a prolonged period within the tissue of origin, but involvement of regional lymph nodes and multiple mucosal sites may be present at diagnosis. Within the stomach, the disease is usually multifocal. Concomitant involvement of multiple mucosal sites is not rare, particularly in non-gastric EMZLs, with disseminated disease reported in 25%e50% of cases. Bone marrow infiltration has been described in 2%e20% of cases, with lower rates in recent series, and is more com- mon in non-gastric lymphomas.13 EMZLs with lymph node or bone marrow involvement at presentation carry a worse prognosis, but this is not the case for those with involve- ment of multiple mucosal sites.14
The best system for staging of gastric MZL is controver- sial.6,7 The Lugano staging system has been widely used previously, but more modern systems have been proposed, such as the Paris staging system which describes the depth of gastric wall involvement more accurately, a parameter that may predict the response to H. pylori eradication (Table 2).7,15
The initial staging procedures must take into account the specific site of presentation (Table 3) and for gastric MZL must include an oesophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with multiple biopsies taken from each region of the stomach, duodenum and gastroesophageal junction and from any site with an abnormal appearance. Routine EGD may also be advisable for patients with non-gastrointestinal MZL, particularly females, those with primary involvement of lung, upper airways and salivary glands and those with a high International Prognostic Index (IPI) score, elevated serum B2M level or H. pylori infection, regardless of the primary site.16,17
 
SMZL. SMZL typically involves the spleen, hilar lymph nodes, bone marrow and, frequently, the blood. Some patients are diagnosed following the incidental finding of a peripheral lymphocytosis. In advanced-stage SMZL, symptomatic splenomegaly and cytopaenia may be the presenting fea- tures.18e20 Some cases of disseminated MZL may present with splenomegaly and lymph node enlargement at distant sites. Approximately 20% of patients have autoimmune manifestations including autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (AIHA), immune thrombocytopaenia, cold agglutinin disease, circulating anticoagulants, acquired von Willebrand disease or angioedema as a result of acquired C1-esterase inhibitor deficiency.
The role of PET is uncertain and SMZL is usually staged by
CT. Abdominal sonography may give additional information to CT scanning for the detection of splenic focal lesions.21,22 PET-CT should be considered if high-grade transformation is suspected.
NMZL. NMZL usually presents with disseminated lymphade- nopathy (mostly cervical and abdominal), with or without bone marrow and blood involvement at diagnosis. The disease is often advanced at presentation and 10%e20% of patients
present with B symptoms (unexplained weight loss >10% in 6 months, unexplained fever >38◦C, drenching night sweats). Anaemia occurs in w25% of patients and thrombocytopaenia
in 10%. Initial staging follows the rules for other nodal lym- phomas, with the main goal to discriminate localised from advanced-stage disease and to have measurable disease for evaluation of treatment response.21e23 Staging should rule out primary EMZL, since around one-third of cases represent nodal dissemination of an EMZL.21,24

Main prognostic factors and prognostic indices
EMZL. The International Extranodal Lymphoma Study Group (IELSG) has developed an EMZL-specific prognostic index using data from more than 400 patients enrolled in a large prospective randomised trial. This index, named MALT-IPI, uses three simple clinical parameters (age 70 years, Ann Arbor stage III or IV and elevated LDH) and allows the
 


Table 2. Comparison of the Lugano and Paris staging systems for gastrointestinal tract lymphoma7,16
	Lugano staging system	Paris staging system	Tumour extension
Stage I	Confined to the GI tract (single primary or multiple, non-contiguous)	T1m N0 M0 T1sm N0 M0 T2 N0 M0
T3 N0 M0	Mucosa Submucosa Muscularis propria
Serosa
Stage II II1
II2	Extending into abdomen Local nodal involvement Distant nodal involvement	
T1e3 N1 M0 T1e3 N2 M0	
Perigastric lymph nodes More distant regional nodes
Stage IIE	Penetration of serosa to involve adjacent organs or tissues	T4 N0e2 M0	Invasion of adjacent structures
with or without abdominal lymph nodes
Stage IV	Disseminated extranodal involvement or concomitant
supra-diaphragmatic nodal involvement	T1e4 N3 M0 T1e4 N0e3 M1 T1e4 N0e3 M2	Extra-abdominal lymph nodes
Distant (non-contiguous) GI sites involvement
Non-GI sites involvement
GI, gastrointestinal.
T describes the gastric wall infiltration; N describes the regional lymph node involvement; M describes distant dissemination. Adapted from Ruskone-Fourmestraux et al.7 and Mazloom et al.16
 

Table 3. Speciﬁc staging and work-up procedures for EMZL at different primary anatomic sites
Site	Exam	Notes
Stomach	EGD
Endoscopic US IHC

FISH or PCR assay	Mandatory
Optional, to evaluate the regional lymph nodes and gastric wall infiltration
Mandatory, to evaluate Helicobacter pylori status. Faecal antigen or breath test and serology studies are recommended when the results of histology are negative
Optional, to detect t(11;18) translocation
Small intestine (IPSID)	PCR, IHC or ISH	Campylobacter jejuni search in the tumour biopsy
Colon	Colonoscopy and EGD	
Ocular adnexa	Orbital and salivary glands imaging (MRI or CT)
Head and neck imaging (MRI or CT) PCR	If clinically indicated

If clinically indicated
Chlamydophila psittaci search in the tumour biopsy and PBMCs (optional, according to the geographical
distribution of the infection)
Salivary glands	ENT examination and echography EGD
Anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La antibodies	

To rule out association with Sjogren syndrome
Lung	Bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage EGD	
Breast	Mammography and breast sonography MRI (or CT scan)	
Thyroid	Thyroid echography CT scan of the neck
Thyroid function tests	
Skin	PCR	Borrelia burgdorferi search in the tumour biopsy
CT, computed tomography; EGD, oesophagogastroduodenoscopy; EMZL, extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma; ENT, ear, nose and throat; FISH, ﬂuorescent in situ hybridisation; IHC, immunohistochemistry; IPSID, immunoproliferative small intestinal disease; ISH, in situ hybridisation; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; US, ultrasound.

 

discrimination of three groups of patients with low, inter- mediate and high risk (corresponding to the presence of 0, 1 or 2 of these factors, respectively). The 5-year event-free survival rates in these groups were 70%, 56% and 29%, respectively. The MALT-IPI distinguished patients with different progression-free, overall and cause-specific sur- vival. Its prognostic utility was retained in gastric and non- gastric lymphomas, as well as in patients treated with different modalities, and was confirmed in a large external validation set of more than 600 patients.25 However, there are no data yet to indicate that the choice of therapy should be based on this index.
SMZL. An Italian lymphoma cooperative group (Intergruppo Italiano Linfomi; IIL) developed a prognostic model in more than 300 patients based on three risk factors (haemoglobin
<12 g/dl, albumin <35 g/l and elevated LDH level).26 A newer prognostic model (named HPLL on the basis of the
determinant factors: haemoglobin concentration, platelet count, LDH level and extrahilar lymphadenopathy) has been developed by the SMZL Study Group from an international retrospective survey of nearly 600 patients27 and identified three risk groups with significantly different outcomes [IV, C]. A simplified version of the HPLL was later proposed and validated.28,29 Analogous to the MALT-IPI, there is no evi- dence supporting the use of these indices to decide whether and which therapy should be given.
NMZL. There is no specific prognostic score established for NMZL. The Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index (FLIPI), although not validated for NMZL, may help
 

discriminate between low- and high-risk patients in smaller patient cohorts.24

TREATMENT
EMZL
Initial therapy with antibiotics in gastric MZL. Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy should be given to all patients with gastric MZL, irrespective of stage [II, A].5e7,30,31 Anti-
H. pylori regimen should be chosen based on the regional microbial ecology; usually triple-therapy regimens combining a proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) for 4 weeks plus clarithromycin with either amoxicillin or metronidazole for 10e14 days are highly effective.32,33 The outcome of eradication therapy should be checked by a urea breath test (or by a monoclonal stool antigen test) at least 6 weeks after starting eradication therapy and at least 2 weeks after PPI withdrawal. Where H. pylori eradication is not suc- cessful, second-line treatment should be attempted with alternative triple- or quadruple-therapy regimens of PPI plus antibiotics.5,7,30,31
In localised H. pylori-positive gastric MZL, the initial treatment should be H. pylori eradication. This treatment can induce lymphoma regression and long-term clinical disease control in three-quarters of patients [II, A]. The length of time necessary to obtain a remission can vary from a few weeks to more than a year. In patients who achieve clinical and endoscopic remission with eradication of H. pylori but have persistent microscopic lymphoma on histology, it is reasonable to wait for at least 12 months
 

 
before starting another treatment [III, B].5,7 Several studies of post-antibiotic molecular follow-up have shown the frequent persistence of monoclonal B cells after histological regression of the lymphoma.5,7
In H. pylori-negative cases, regression of the lymphoma after antibiotic treatment is less likely and the immediate start of specific anti-lymphoma treatments (see below) may be considered. A trial of anti-Helicobacter therapy may still be worthwhile, since occasional lymphoma responses have been reported, possibly due to a false-negative test or infection by other Helicobacter species [IV, C].7,34 In these
H.	pylori-negative patients, specific treatment [usually radiotherapy (RT) as described below] should be considered if no signs of lymphoma regression are seen at a repeat endoscopy assessment 3e6 months after antibiotic therapy. Figure 1 summarises the recommended treatment algorithm for localised gastric MZL. After anti-H. pylori treatment, the patients presenting with advanced disease (stage IV) can be managed expectantly (watch-and-wait) unless systemic treatment (see ‘Other treatments for EMZL’) is required because of symptomatic disease. Any treatment decision should also take into account the pa-
tient’s preference (Figure 2).
Anti-infective therapy in non-gastric EMZL. Eradication therapy with antibiotics in EMZL arising outside the stom- ach remains investigational. While H. pylori eradication is not recommended for extra-gastric MZL, various results suggest the involvement of other infectious agents, espe- cially in ocular adnexal EMZL. As response rates up to 65% with long-lasting complete remissions have been reported, antibiotic therapy may be considered for initial therapy in patients with ocular EMZL, if they are not in need of urgent treatment to preserve their sight.35
Recent results have shown that therapy of HCV infection may lead to regression of lymphoma in patients with HCV- associated EZML, suggesting that these (rare) patients should also be given anti-HCV drugs as initial therapy of EZML [IV, B].36
RT in localised EMZL: recommended doses and schedules at different sites. In patients who do not achieve lymphoma regression following antibiotic therapy, irradiation and sys- temic oncological therapies should be used, depending on the stage of disease. RT is the preferred option for treatment of localised disease. Excellent disease control using RT alone has been reported in several series, supporting the use of moderate-dose (e.g. 24e30 Gy to the stomach and perigastric nodes, given over 3e4 weeks) involved-field RT (IFRT) in gastric EMZL [IIeIV, AeB].37,38 A phase III trial from the UK has further shown that the dose of RT can be safely lowered to 24 Gy in indolent lymphomas, including those of MALT, without compromising local tumour control in the long term [II, A].39 A recent guideline from the International Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group (ILROG) clearly describes the volumes to be treated for each site of extranodal lym- phomas, including MALT, in respect of the modern defini-
tion of involved-site RT (ISRT).40
 
Long-term complications related to irradiation of EMZL are rare, dose-dependent and predominantly related to orbital irradiation. There is an increased risk of cataract and dry eyes for doses >4e5 Gy, while ischaemic retinopathy, optic atrophy, corneal ulceration and glaucoma are un- common for doses below 36 Gy. More recently, low-dose RT (4 Gy in two fractions) has been increasingly used in the management of indolent non-Hodgkin lymphomas, with progression-free survival (PFS) rates of w70% at 5 years.41
This fractionation may be extremely useful in particular anatomical presentations, such as ocular adnexa lym- phomas, where the lower dose reduces the risk of cataract while maintaining high response rates (96%) and durable local control (96% at 2 years), as shown by a retrospective study from the United States.42 The standard recommended dose still remains 24 Gy, but a low-dose schedule (4 Gy) may also be considered in the elderly or in the setting of a palliative treatment for patients with advanced-stage EMZL unfit for systemic therapy or in critical sites (considering the possibility to deliver the standard dose in case of no response to 4 Gy).

Other treatments for EMZL. Chemotherapy (ChT), immu- notherapy, or combination chemoimmunotherapy are all effective in patients with EMZL who require systemic treatment. Usually, systemic treatment is preferred in pa- tients with symptomatic systemic disease, contraindications to RT, failure after antibiotics or after local therapy (RT or surgery), and also in those with histological transformation (Figure 2).5,7,43
Relatively few compounds and regimens have been tested specifically in EMZLs. Hence, patients should be offered enrolment in clinical trials where available. As in other indolent lymphomas, alkylating agents (either cyclophos- phamide or chlorambucil) or purine nucleoside analogues (ﬂudarabine, cladribine) have shown activity [III, B].44,45
The efficacy of rituximab in combination with chlorambucil has been proven in a large randomised phase III study [I, A].46 This combination was well tolerated and improved complete response rate (CRR), event-free survival and PFS compared with either rituximab or chlorambucil as single agents, although no overall survival (OS) benefit was seen. Since the efficacy of rituximab monotherapy has also been demon- strated in phase II studies, its use can be considered when the potential toxicity of ChT is a relevant issue [III, B].47e49
A phase II study of the combination of rituximab and bendamustine has shown good activity, including in cases carrying t(11;18). Most patients achieve a complete remis- sion after 4 cycles of this combination and it may be possible to stop treatment at this point,50,51 thereby avoiding the greater toxicity of longer schedules [III, A]. The need for rituximab maintenance is controversial, with no evidence of OS benefit52,53 and there are no published data supporting rituximab maintenance [III, D].
Consolidation therapy with chlorambucil is not beneficial in patients with gastric lymphoma responding to H. pylori eradication [II, D].54
 

Gastric MZL, Stage I–IIEa



Helicobacter pylori test


 
Helicobacter pylori positive
t(11;18) negative or undetermined
 
Helicobacter pylori negative or	 	
Helicobacter pylori positive with t(11;18)
 


Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy
Standard antibiotics plus PPI [II, A]


Helicobacter pylori test at least 6 weeks after starting eradication therapy and at least 2 weeks after PPI withdrawal


 
Helicobacter pylori eradicated
 
Helicobacter pylori detected
 
Alternative antibiotics plus PPI
 


 

EGD and biopsy at 3–6 months
 
Helicobacter pylori not eradicated or no lymphoma response
 


 
Negative for lymphoma
 
Positive for residual lymphoma, asymptomatic
 
Positive for lymphoma, symptomatic or with
other treatment indications [overt progression,	 	                             deep invasion, nodal involvement, t(11;18)]
 



EGD and biopsy
every 6 months for 2 years then every 12–18 months
 


EGD and biopsy	ISRT [II–IV, A–B]
every 3–6 months
 
if RT not feasible    	 or not indicated

R-chlorambucil [I, A] R-bendamustine [III, A]
Rituximab [III, B]
R-lenalidomide [III, C]
 

Figure 1. Treatment algorithm for localised gastric MZL.
EGD, oesophagogastroduodenoscopy; ISRT, involved-site radiotherapy; MZL, marginal zone B-cell lymphoma; PPI, proton-pump inhibitor; R, rituximab; RT, radiotherapy.
a Stage is defined according to the Lugano staging system described in Table 2.
 

Gastric MZL, Stage IVa	Non-gastric EMZL, Stage IV




Helicobacter pylori test



Helicobacter pylori positive	Helicobacter pylori negative



Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy
Standard antibiotics plus PPI [II, A]






 
Asymptomatic lymphoma
 
Symptomatic lymphoma or with other treatment indications (overt progression, deep invasion, bulky disease, impending organ damage, patient preference)
 




 
Watch-and-wait
EGD and systemic follow-up twice per year for 2 years, then every 12–18 months
 
R-chlorambucil [I, A] R-bendamustine [III, A]
Rituximab [III, B]
R-lenalidomide [III, C] Consider enrolment in clinical trials
 

Figure 2. Treatment algorithms for advanced gastric MZL and non-gastric EMZL.
EGD, oesophagogastroduodenoscopy; EMZL, extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma; MZL, marginal zone B-cell lymphoma; PPI, proton-pump inhibitor; R, rituximab.
a Stage is defined according to the Lugano staging system described in Table 2.
 
Rituximab in combination with lenalidomide has shown promising activity in a phase II study, with an acceptable toxicity profile [III, C].55
Lymphomas carrying the t(11;18) are usually unrespon- sive to alkylating agents as sole treatment but are sensitive to purine analogues or rituximab.5,7
The combination of rituximab and ﬂudarabine has shown noteworthy activity in EMZLs56,57 but there are risks of sig- nificant immunotoxicity and secondary myelodysplasia [III, C]. Anthracycline-containing	regimens	are	not	usually necessary and should be reserved for the few patients with a very aggressive clinical course with suspected histological transformation [IV, A].43 Cases with proven histological transformation	should		be	treated	with		chemo- immunotherapy according to the guidelines for diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma [II, A].58
Surgery has not been shown to achieve superior results than less invasive approaches in EMZL. It may impair the quality of life, and procedures such as gastrectomy no longer have a role in the initial treatment of EMZL.59,60

SMZL
In asymptomatic patients, an active surveillance (watch- and-wait) policy is recommended, with follow-up evaluation every 3e6 months (physical exam, abdominal US, blood count and biochemistry).
In patients with concomitant chronic HCV infection who do not immediately need conventional treatment, antiviral therapy should be considered [IV, B].22,36,61
The main criteria for initiating treatment in SMZL are the presence of progressive or symptomatic splenomegaly and/ or any progressive cytopaenias (haemoglobin <10 g/dl,
platelets <80 000/ml, neutrophils <1000/ml). Autoimmune
disorders such as AIHA or idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura, if present, should be specifically treated [V, B]. For SMZL, the recognised therapeutic options are sple-
nectomy,18,62,63 ChT,22,64,65 rituximab alone66e68 or ritux- imab plus ChT.22,65,66,69
Splenectomy was traditionally considered as the recom- mended first treatment for patients with SMZL. The majority of patients who had a splenectomy showed haematological responses with restoration of cytopaenias and a fast reso- lution of splenomegaly-related symptoms. The 5-year PFS and OS are 50%e60% and 70%e80%, respectively, and approximately half of the splenectomised patients did not require further treatment for SMZL.70,71 However, it is a major surgical procedure that may have severe, and poten- tially fatal, acute and late complications. Moreover, sple- nectomy cannot completely eradicate the disease and has been largely replaced by rituximab (with or without ChT) in the last two decades as the preferred initial therapy [III, A].72 Rituximab therapy alone (375 mg/m2 4- to 8-weekly
doses) can produce a rapid response, with a high overall response rate (>80%) and CRR (>40%) with minimal toxicity. Responses to rituximab appear to be long lasting, with a 10-year PFS exceeding 60%.70 Maintenance with rituximab (every 2 months for 1e2 years) may improve PFS
 
but no OS advantage has been shown to date and main- tenance may not be superior to retreatment on demand.70 Rituximab usually remains active at relapse.
Rituximab can be particularly useful in patients with autoimmune disorders, since it can allow concomitant control of AIHA (or idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura) and lymphoma, thereby avoiding the toxicity of long-term steroid administration.
For the patients who do not respond to rituximab, splenectomy [IV, B] or the addition of ChT may be consid- ered. Chemoimmunotherapy is particularly indicated for fit patients with symptomatic disseminated disease, constitu- tional symptoms and/or signs of high-grade transformation [III, B].

NMZL
Treatment should follow the principles of therapy for follicular lymphoma [IV, B]. In advanced-stage NMZL with low tumour burden and lack of clinical symptoms, a watch- and-wait strategy may be followed. Treatment should be initiated in the case of B symptoms, deterioration of pe- ripheral blood counts due to lymphoma infiltration of the bone marrow, rapid enlargement of lymph nodes or compression of vital organs by bulky disease. RT should be considered in patients presenting with localised disease.
Rituximab combined with ChT is the backbone of treatment. There are different options for ChT including rituximab/bendamustine, rituximab/cyclophosphamide/ doxorubicin/vincristine/prednisone (R-CHOP), rituximab/ cyclophosphamide/vincristine/prednisone (R-CVP) or rit- uximab/ﬂudarabine. Fludarabine combined with rituximab, however, was associated with high treatment-related toxicity.57 Rituximab/bendamustine followed by rituximab maintenance was associated with higher treatment-related mortality than R-CHOP in a large randomised phase III trial, comprising 195 treatment-naive patients with MZL (66 with NMZL), along with patients with follicular lymphoma.73 Thus, the choice of the ChT partner should be adapted to the individual fitness of the patient and the risk of in- fections. Rituximab maintenance is optional, as there is no evidence from prospective randomised studies that this is superior to observation after successful induction in NMZL.74 In patients with NMZL and concurrent HCV-related chronic hepatitis, antiviral treatment may induce remission in a high proportion of cases. In patients not needing im- mediate lymphoma treatment, antiviral therapy should be considered as first treatment [IV, B].36,61

MZL patients with recurrent disease
Asymptomatic patients may be observed (watch-and-wait) and RT may be considered for MZL patients with localised relapses.61 If systemic treatment is required, chemo- immunotherapy can be repeated after long initial re- missions ( 24 months). Autologous transplantation may be considered in fit patients with clinically aggressive relapse. In other cases, an alternate chemoimmunotherapy regimen can be used. In a phase II trial, ibrutinib single-agent
 

Table 4. GELA grading system proposed to deﬁne the histological response of gastric MZL after Helicobacter pylori eradication72
Response (score)	Description	Histological characteristics
CR	Complete histological remission	Normal or empty LP and/or fibrosis with absent
or scattered plasma cells and small lymphoid cells in the LP, no LEL
pMRD	Probable minimal residual disease	Empty LP and/or fibrosis with aggregates of lymphoid cells or lymphoid nodules in the LP/MM and/or SM, no LEL
rRD	Responding residual disease	Focal empty LP and/or fibrosis with dense, diffuse or nodular
lymphoid infiltrate, extending around glands in the LP, focal LEL or absent
NC	No change	Dense, diffuse or nodular lymphoid infiltrate, LEL usually present
GELA, Groupe d’Etude des Lymphomes de l’Adulte; LEL, lymphoepithelial lesion; LP, lamina propria; MM, muscularis mucosa; MZL, marginal zone B-cell lymphoma; SM, submucosa.
Reprinted from Kalpadakis et al.72 with permission.

 
therapy showed anti-lymphoma activity in MZL including NMZL, leading to approval of the drug in the United States for the treatment of patients with MZL who require sys- temic therapy and have received at least one prior anti- CD20-based therapy.75 The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor copanlisib had also demonstrated significant effi- cacy and a manageable safety profile in heavily pretreated patients with relapsed or refractory MZL.76 Thus, these targeted agents may become a treatment option, in particular for patients with short remissions after rituximab- containing chemoimmunotherapy [III, B].75

RESPONSE EVALUATION AND FOLLOW-UP
General considerations
Asymptomatic patients with disseminated MZL (SMZL and NMZL) being managed expectantly (watch-and-wait) should be monitored by physical examination, imaging as clinically required, blood counts and biochemistry every 6 months. The interval between visits may be shortened when there is increasing splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, cytopaenias and/or symptoms related to the disease. A CT scan or bone marrow biopsy is not indicated unless there are signs of disease progression.
Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET investigation can be considered in selected cases when there are clinical and/or


Table 5. Response criteria for SMZL
Complete response	Resolution of organomegaly (spleen longitudinal diameter <13 cm)
Hb >12 g/dl, platelets >100 × 109/l and neutrophils
>1.5 × 109/l
No evidence of circulating clonal B cells by ﬂow
cytometry (light chain-restricted B cells)
No evidence of bone marrow infiltration detected by IHC
Negative DAT and PET (if positive at diagnosis)
Partial response	Regression ≥50% in all the measurable disease manifestations
No new sites of disease Improvement of cytopaenias
Decrease of infiltration and improvement of
haematopoietic reserve at bone marrow biopsy
No change	<10% Improvement on the disease manifestations
Colonoscopy and EGD
Progression	>50% measurable signs of the disease from nadir
Relapse	Reappearance of any measurable sign of the disease
DAT, direct antiglobulin test; EGD, oesophagogastroduodenoscopy; Hb, haemoglo- bin; IHC, immunohistochemistry; PET, positron emission tomography; SMZL, splenic marginal zone lymphoma.

 
 
laboratory findings to suggest possible histological trans- formation. PET scans should also be carried out in cases where transformation has been demonstrated, for staging. Patients with EMZL at non-gastric sites who have completed treatment can be re-evaluated in the same way as any other indolent lymphoma (clinical examination, lab- oratory work-up, imaging/biopsy of residual lesions if indi- cated) every 3 months for the first 2 years, and every 6
months thereafter.

Gastric MZL
Sequential evaluation of gastric biopsies remains an essential follow-up procedure for gastric MZL to exclude either persistent disease or the appearance of early epithelial changes which may lead to gastric carcinoma, particularly in patients with persistent H. pylori infection. Unfortunately, the interpretation of lymphoid infiltrates in post-treatment gastric biopsies can be very difficult and there are no uniform criteria for the definition of histolog- ical remission. Comparison with previous biopsies is helpful to assess response, and the authors recommend the Groupe d’ Etude des Lymphomes de l’ Adulte (GELA) scoring system (Table 4) as a reproducible method [IV, B].77
Following the documentation of H. pylori eradication, strict endoscopic follow-up is recommended, with multiple biopsies taken 2e3 months after treatment to rule out tumour progression, and subsequently (twice per year for 2 years) to monitor the histological regression of the lymphoma.
Gastric MZLs have a limited tendency to distant spread and to histological transformation. Transient, apparent his- tological relapses are occasionally observed in endoscopic follow-up biopsies but are considered a relapse only if they are sustained and progressive, as they are often self- limiting, especially in the absence of H. pylori reinfection. Hence, in the case of persistent but stable residual disease or histological relapse (without distant dissemination and/ or gross endoscopic tumour), a watch-and-wait policy ap- pears to be safe [IV, C].78e80
Nevertheless, long-term endoscopic and systemic follow- up (clinical examination, blood counts every 12e18 months) is recommended. The risk of gastric adenocarci- noma among patients diagnosed with gastric MZLs has been reported to be six-fold higher than in the general population, although it still remains relatively low,81 and the
 

Table 6. Summary of recommendations
Staging and risk assessment
●	Initial staging for all MZL subtypes should include history and physical examination, full blood and differential counts, biochemistry including renal and liver function tests, protein electrophoresis, LDH and B2M, serum and urine immunofixation, serology for HBV, HCV and HIV and cryoglobulins and cryocrit if HCV- positive
●	IHC panel including at least CD20, CD10, CD5, CD23, cyclin D1 and IgD with diagnostic evaluation by an expert haematopathologist [IV, B]
●	Clinical and biological prognosticators (HPLL, MALT-IPI) should be applied in clinical routine to estimate the clinical behaviour [IIIeIV, C]
Treatment
EMZL
●	Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy should be given to all patients with gastric MZL [II, A]
●	ISRT is the preferred option for treatment of localised EMZL (moderate dose, which may vary according to the site) [IIeIV, AeB]
●	Anti-HCV therapy is recommended in patients with HCV-associated lymphoma [IV, B]
●	Other treatments including ChT, immunotherapy or combination chemoimmunotherapy are indicated in patients with symptomatic disseminated disease, con- traindications to RT, failure after antibiotics or after local therapy or clinical suspicion of histological transformation: R-chlorambucil [I, A], R-bendamustine
[III, A], rituximab monotherapy [III, B], R-lenalidomide [III, C] and R-CHOP for (clinically suspected or biopsy-proven) histological transformation SMZL
●	Rituximab alone is the preferred initial therapy in patients with SMZL [III, A]
●	Chemoimmunotherapy is indicated when rituximab alone is ineffective or in the presence of disseminated symptomatic disease and/or signs of high-grade transformation [III, B]
●	Anti-HCV therapy should be considered in patients with HCV-associated lymphoma [IV, B]
●	Splenectomy may be considered in selected cases, when rituximab is not indicated or ineffective [IV, B] NMZL
●	Treatment should follow the principles of therapy for follicular lymphoma [IV, B]
●	Anti-HCV therapy should be considered in patients with HCV-associated lymphoma [IV, B]
●	Chemoimmunotherapy is recommended in patients with NMZL (e.g. R-bendamustine, R-CHOP, R-CVP) [IV, B]
Response evaluation and follow-up
●	Asymptomatic patients with disseminated MZL (SMZL and NMZL) being managed by watch-and-wait should be monitored by physical examination, imaging as clinically required, blood counts and biochemistry every 6 months
●	Patients with EMZL at non-gastric sites can be re-evaluated with clinical examination, laboratory work-up and imaging/biopsy of residual lesions if indicated every 3 months for the first 2 years, and every 6 months thereafter
Gastric MZL
●	Sequential evaluation of gastric biopsies remains an essential follow-up procedure for gastric MZL, particularly in patients with persistent Helicobacter pylori
infection
SMZL
●	Specific criteria for response assessment are recommended for SMZL and achievement of CR is defined by normal spleen size, normal blood counts, negative
ﬂow cytometry on blood and negative IHC on bone marrow biopsy
B2M, b2 microglobulin; ChT, chemotherapy; CR, complete remission; EMZL, extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HPLL, prognostic model based on haemoglobin concentration, platelet count, LDH level and extrahilar lymphadenopathy; IgD, immunoglobulin D; IHC, immunohistochemistry; ISRT, involved-site radiotherapy; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MALT-IPI, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue-International Prognostic Index; MZL, marginal zone B-cell lymphoma; NMZL, nodal splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma; R, rituximab; R-CHOP, rituximab/cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincristine/prednisone; R-CVP, rit- uximab/cyclophosphamide/vincristine/prednisone; RT, radiotherapy; SMZL, splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma.

 
risk of other non-Hodgkin lymphomas may be increased as well.82

SMZL
In view of the particular clinical presentation of SMZL, specific criteria for response assessment are recommended (Table 5). In particular, achievement of CR is defined by normal spleen size, normal blood counts, negative ﬂow cytometry on blood and negative IHC on bone marrow biopsy.9,22

PERSONALISED MEDICINE
Risk stratification using the specific prognostic indices for EMZL25 and SMZL26,28 may help the discussion of treatment options with patients, but these prognostic scores are not validated as tools to decide whether and which treatment is indicated.
In gastric MZL, the absence of H. pylori, the deep invasion of the gastric wall (beyond the submucosa), the involvement of regional lymph nodes, the presence of chromosomal trans- locations that result in deregulation of MALT1 or BCL10 and other genetic features (such as overexpression of miR-142-5p and miR-155) may be associated with a reduced probability of
 
lymphoma regression after antibiotics.5,30,31,43,83 As discussed in the ‘Diagnosis and pathology/molecular biology’ section, detection of t(11;18) may also help to identify patients less likely to respond to alkylating agents alone. Nevertheless, in this disease, more research is needed to identify and validate molecular markers which might lead to more precise targeted therapies. In SMLZ, several molecular features (Ig mutational status, NOTCH2 and KLF2 mutations, TP53 abnormalities, and aberrant promoter methylation) have been reported as potentially useful biomarkers, which might be integrated in the clinical indices for a better risk stratification.22

METHODOLOGY
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accor- dance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development, http://www.esmo. org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The rele- vant literature has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of recommendations is shown in Table 6. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 7. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.
 
Bristol-Myers Squibb and travel expenses from Pfizer; ML is a member of the speaker’s bureau of Celgene, Janssen-Cilag, Roche, Bayer, Amgen and Mundipharma; MP has declared no conﬂicts of interest.


 
















a By permission of the Infectious Diseases Society of America.84

 




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The ESMO Guidelines Committee would like to thank the ESMO Faculty and other experts who provided critical re- views of these ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines.

FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.

DISCLOSURE
EZ has received research support from Roche, Janssen and Celgene; LA has reported consultancy or advisory role for Roche, Bayer, Celgene, Sandoz and Gilead Sciences, has received research funding from Gilead Sciences and travel expenses from Roche, Celgene, Gilead Sciences and EUSA Pharma and is a member of the speaker’s bureau for Celgene; CB has received research support from Roche, Bayer, Amgen and Janssen; PWJ has received research support from Epi- zyme and Janssen and consultancy for Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Celgene, Carrick, Karus, Genmab and Incyte; MR has received support from Celgene, Novartis, Ipsen and Roche; UR is a member of the speaker’s bureau of AstraZeneca, Merck, Sharp and Dohme and Bayer; AS is a member of the speaker’s bureau of Janssen, Roche and Mundipharma; KS has reported consultancy and advisory board for Janssen and Gilead Sciences and has received institutional research support from Janssen, Gilead Sciences and AbbVie; CT has reported consultancy or advisory role for Janssen, Roche, Bayer and Celgene, has received research funding from Roche and Janssen and travel expenses from Sanofi and Roche and is a member of the speaker’s bureau for Cellectis; AW has received service fees from Celgene and
 
REFERENCES
1.	Campo E, Pileri SA, Jaffe ES, et al. Nodal marginal zone B-cell lym- phoma. In: Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al., eds. WHO Clas- siﬁcation of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Revised 4th ed. Lyon: IARC; 2017:263e265.
2.	Piris MA, Isaacson PI, Swerdlow SH, et al. Splenic marginal zone lym- phoma. In: Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al., eds. WHO Clas- siﬁcation of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Revised 4th ed. Lyon: IARC Press; 2017:223e225.
3.	Cook JR, Isaacson PG, Chott A, et al. Extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma). In: Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al., eds. WHO Classiﬁcation of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Revised 4th ed. Lyon: IARC Press; 2017:259e262.
4.	Xochelli A, Kalpadakis C, Gardiner A, et al. Clonal B-cell lymphocytosis exhibiting immunophenotypic features consistent with a marginal- zone origin: is this a distinct entity? Blood. 2014;123:1199e1206.
5.	Zucca E, Bertoni F. The spectrum of MALT lymphoma at different sites: biological and therapeutic relevance. Blood. 2016;127:2082e2092.
6.	Dreyling M, Thieblemont C, Gallamini A, et al. ESMO Consensus con- ferences: guidelines on malignant lymphoma. Part 2: marginal zone lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Ann Oncol. 2013;24:857e877.
7.	Ruskone-Fourmestraux A, Fischbach W, Aleman BM, et al. EGILS consensus report. Gastric extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of MALT. Gut. 2011;60:747e758.
8.	Franco V, Florena AM, Iannitto E. Splenic marginal zone lymphoma.
Blood. 2003;101:2464e2472.
9.	Matutes E, Oscier D, Montalban C, et al. Splenic marginal zone lym- phoma proposals for a revision of diagnostic, staging and therapeutic criteria. Leukemia. 2008;22:487e495.
10.	Ponzoni M, Kanellis G, Pouliou E, et al. Bone marrow histopathology in the diagnostic evaluation of splenic marginal-zone and splenic diffuse red pulp small B-cell lymphoma: a reliable substitute for spleen his- topathology? Am J Surg Pathol. 2012;36:1609e1618.
11.	Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Pileri SA, et al. The 2016 revision of the World Health Organization classification of lymphoid neoplasms. Blood. 2016;127:2375e2390.
12.	Swerdlow SH, Kuzu I, Dogan A, et al. The many faces of small B cell lymphomas with plasmacytic differentiation and the contribution of MYD88 testing. Virchows Arch. 2016;468:259e275.
13.	Raderer M, Kiesewetter B, Ferreri AJ. Clinicopathologic characteris- tics and treatment of marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa- associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma). CA Cancer J Clin. 2016;66:153e171.
14.	Zucca E, Conconi A, Pedrinis E, et al. Nongastric marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. Blood. 2003;101: 2489e2495.
15.	Ruskone-Fourmestraux A, Dragosics B, Morgner A, et al. Paris staging system for primary gastrointestinal lymphomas. Gut. 2003;52:912e913.
16.	Mazloom A, Rodriguez A, Ha CS, et al. Incidence of gastric involvement in patients with nongastrointestinal extranodal marginal zone lym- phoma. Cancer. 2011;117:2461e2466.
17.	Ogusa E, Tomita N, Ishii Y, et al. Clinical manifestations of primary pulmonary extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa- associated lymphoid tissue in Japanese population. Hematol Oncol. 2013;31:18e21.
18.	Thieblemont C, Felman P, Callet-Bauchu E, et al. Splenic marginal-zone lymphoma: a distinct clinical and pathological entity. Lancet Oncol. 2003;4:95e103.
 
19.	Thieblemont C, Felman P, Berger F, et al. Treatment of splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma: an analysis of 81 patients. Clin Lymphoma. 2002;3:41e47.
20.	Thieblemont C, Davi F, Noguera ME, et al. Splenic marginal zone lymphoma: current knowledge and future directions. Oncology (Willi- ston Park). 2012;26:194e202.
21.	Traverse-Glehen A, Bertoni F, Thieblemont C, et al. Nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma: a diagnostic and therapeutic dilemma. Oncology (Williston Park). 2012;26:92e99, 103e104.
22.	Arcaini L, Rossi D, Paulli M. Splenic marginal zone lymphoma: from genetics to management. Blood. 2016;127:2072e2081.
23.	Berger F, Felman P, Thieblemont C, et al. Non-MALT marginal zone B-cell lymphomas: a description of clinical presentation and outcome in 124 patients. Blood. 2000;95:1950e1956.
24.	Arcaini L, Paulli M, Burcheri S, et al. Primary nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma: clinical features and prognostic assessment of a rare dis- ease. Br J Haematol. 2007;136:301e304.
25.	Thieblemont C, Cascione L, Conconi A, et al. A MALT lymphoma prognostic index. Blood. 2017;130:1409e1417.
26.	Arcaini L, Lazzarino M, Colombo N, et al. Splenic marginal zone lymphoma: a prognostic model for clinical use. Blood. 2006;107:4643e4649.
27.	Montalban C, Abraira V, Arcaini L, et al. Risk stratification for splenic marginal zone lymphoma based on haemoglobin concentration, platelet count, high lactate dehydrogenase level and extrahilar lymphadenopathy: development and validation on 593 cases. Br J Haematol. 2012;159:164e171.
28.	Montalban C, Abraira V, Arcaini L, et al. Simplification of risk stratifi- cation for splenic marginal zone lymphoma: a point-based score for practical use. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014;55:929e931.
29.	Kalpadakis C, Pangalis GA, Angelopoulou MK, et al. Validation of the simplified prognostic score for splenic marginal zone lymphoma of the Splenic Marginal Zone Lymphoma Working Group. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014;55:2640e2642.
30.	Thieblemont C, Zucca E. Clinical aspects and therapy of gastrointestinal MALT lymphoma. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2017;30:109e117.
31.	Bertoni F, Coiffier B, Salles G, et al. MALT lymphomas: pathogenesis can drive treatment. Oncology (Williston Park). 2011;25:1134e1142, 1147.
32.	Fuccio L, Laterza L, Zagari RM, et al. Treatment of Helicobacter pylori infection. BMJ. 2008;337:a1454.
33.	Zullo A, Hassan C, Cristofari F, et al. Effects of Helicobacter pylori eradication on early stage gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;8:105e110.
34.	Zullo A, Hassan C, Ridola L, et al. Eradication therapy in Helicobacter pylori-negative, gastric low-grade mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma patients: a systematic review. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2013;47: 824e827.
35.	Kiesewetter B, Raderer M. Antibiotic therapy in nongastrointestinal MALT lymphoma: a review of the literature. Blood. 2013;122:1350e 1357.
36.	Arcaini L, Vallisa D, Rattotti S, et al. Antiviral treatment in patients with indolent B-cell lymphomas associated with HCV infection: a study of the Fondazione Italiana Linfomi. Ann Oncol. 2014;25:1404e1410.
37.	Wirth A, Gospodarowicz M, Aleman BM, et al. Long-term outcome for gastric marginal zone lymphoma treated with radiotherapy: a retro- spective, multi-centre, International Extranodal Lymphoma Study Group study. Ann Oncol. 2013;24:1344e1351.
38.	Goda JS, Gospodarowicz M, Pintilie M, et al. Long-term outcome in localized extranodal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas treated with radiotherapy. Cancer. 2010;116:3815e3824.
39.	Lowry L, Smith P, Qian W, et al. Reduced dose radiotherapy for local control in non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a randomised phase III trial. Radiother Oncol. 2011;100:86e92.
40.	Yahalom J, Illidge T, Specht L, et al. Modern radiation therapy for extranodal lymphomas: field and dose guidelines from the International Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92:11e31.
41.	Hoskin PJ, Kirkwood AA, Popova B, et al. 4 Gy versus 24 Gy radio- therapy for patients with indolent lymphoma (FORT): a randomised phase 3 non-inferiority trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:457e463.
42.	 
Fasola CE, Jones JC, Huang DD, et al. Low-dose radiation therapy (2 Gy x 2) in the treatment of orbital lymphoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013;86:930e935.
43.	Thieblemont C. Clinical presentation and management of marginal zone lymphomas. Hematology (Am Soc Hematol Educ Program). 2005:307e313.
44.	Hammel P, Haioun C, Chaumette MT, et al. Efficacy of single-agent chemotherapy in low-grade B-cell mucosa- associated lymphoid tis- sue lymphoma with prominent gastric expression. J Clin Oncol. 1995;13:2524e2529.
45.	Jager G, Neumeister P, Brezinschek R, et al. Treatment of extranodal marginal zone b-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type with cladribine: a phase II study. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:3872e 3877.
46.	Zucca E, Conconi A, Martinelli G, et al. Final results of the IELSG-19 randomized trial of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: improved event-free and progression-free survival with rituximab plus chlorambucil versus either chlorambucil or rituximab monotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:1905e1912.
47.	Conconi A, Martinelli G, Thieblemont C, et al. Clinical activity of rit- uximab in extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of MALT type. Blood. 2003;102:2741e2745.
48.	Martinelli G, Laszlo D, Conconi A, et al. Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) in gastric extranodal marginal zone (MALT) non-Hodgkins lymphoma (NHL) patients: clinical and biological results (phase II study). Blood. 2003;102:410a.
49.	Raderer M, Jager G, Brugger S, et al. Rituximab for treatment of advanced extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma of the mucosa- associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Oncology. 2003;65:306e310.
50.	Salar A, Domingo-Domenech E, Panizo C, et al. First-line response- adapted treatment with the combination of bendamustine and ritux- imab in patients with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma (MALT2008-01): a multicentre, single-arm, phase 2 trial. Lancet Hae- matol. 2014;1:e104ee111.
51.	Salar A, Domingo-Domenech E, Panizo C, et al. Long-term results of a phase II study of rituximab and bendamustine for mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Blood. 2017;130:1772e1774.
52.	Rummel MJ, Koenigsmann M, Chow KU, et al. Two years rituximab maintenance vs. observation after first line treatment with bendamus- tine plus rituximab (B-R) in patients with marginal zone lymphoma (MZL): Results of a prospective, randomized, multicenter phase 2 study (the StiL NHL7-2008 MAINTAIN trial). J Clin Oncol. 2018;36:7515.
53.	Stathis A, Gregorini A, Gressin R, et al. IELSG-38: A phase II study of chlorambucil in combination with rituximab followed by maintenance therapy with subcutaneous rituximab in patients with extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). Blood. 2017;130:1506.
54.	Hancock BW, Qian W, Linch D, et al. Chlorambucil versus observation after anti-Helicobacter therapy in gastric MALT lymphomas: results of the in- ternational randomised LY03 trial. Br J Haematol. 2009;144:367e375.
55.	Kiesewetter B, Willenbacher E, Willenbacher W, et al. A phase 2 study of rituximab plus lenalidomide for mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Blood. 2017;129:383e385.
56.	Salar A, Domingo-Domenech E, Estany C, et al. Combination therapy with rituximab and intravenous or oral ﬂudarabine in the first-line, systemic treatment of patients with extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type. Cancer. 2009;115:5210e5217.
57.	Brown JR, Friedberg JW, Feng Y, et al. A phase 2 study of concurrent ﬂudarabine and rituximab for the treatment of marginal zone lym- phomas. Br J Haematol. 2009;145:741e748.
58.	Tilly H, Gomes da Silva M, Vitolo U, et al. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL): ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(Suppl 5):v116ev125.
59.	Koch P, Probst A, Berdel WE, et al. Treatment results in localized pri- mary gastric lymphoma: data of patients registered within the German multicenter study (GIT NHL 02/96). J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:7050e7059.
60.	Zucca E, Stathis A, Bertoni F. The management of nongastric MALT lymphomas. Oncology (Williston Park). 2014;28:86e93.
 
61.	Arcaini L, Paulli M, Boveri E, et al. Splenic and nodal marginal zone lymphomas are indolent disorders at high hepatitis C virus seropre- valence with distinct presenting features but similar morphologic and phenotypic profiles. Cancer. 2004;100:107e115.
62.	Chacon JI, Mollejo M, Munoz E, et al. Splenic marginal zone lymphoma: clinical characteristics and prognostic factors in a series of 60 patients. Blood. 2002;100:1648e1654.
63.	Kalpadakis C, Pangalis GA, Angelopoulou MK, et al. Treatment of splenic marginal zone lymphoma with rituximab monotherapy: progress report and comparison with splenectomy. Oncologist. 2013;18:190e197.
64.	Lefrere F, Hermine O, Belanger C, et al. Fludarabine: an effective treatment in patients with splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes. Leukemia. 2000;14:573e575.
65.	Cervetti G, Galimberti S, Pelosini M, et al. Significant efficacy of 2- chlorodeoxyadenosine rituximab in the treatment of splenic mar- ginal zone lymphoma (SMZL): extended follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2013;24: 2434e2438.
66.	Tsimberidou AM, Catovsky D, Schlette E, et al. Outcomes in patients with splenic marginal zone lymphoma and marginal zone lymphoma treated with rituximab with or without chemotherapy or chemo- therapy alone. Cancer. 2006;107:125e135.
67.	Kalpadakis C, Pangalis GA, Dimopoulou MN, et al. Rituximab mono- therapy is highly effective in splenic marginal zone lymphoma. Hematol Oncol. 2007;25:127e131.
68.	Bennett M, Sharma K, Yegena S, et al. Rituximab monotherapy for splenic marginal zone lymphoma. Haematologica. 2005;90:856e858.
69.	Iannitto E, Bellei M, Amorim S, et al. Efficacy of bendamustine and rituximab in splenic marginal zone lymphoma: results from the phase II BRISMA/IELSG36 study. Br J Haematol. 2018;183:755e765.
70.	Kalpadakis C, Pangalis GA, Sachanas S, et al. Rituximab monotherapy in splenic marginal zone lymphoma: prolonged responses and potential benefit from maintenance. Blood. 2018;132:666e670.
71.	Kalpadakis C, Pangalis GA, Angelopoulou MK, et al. Treatment of splenic marginal zone lymphoma. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2017;30:139e148.
72.	Kalpadakis C, Pangalis GA, Angelopoulou MK, et al. Should rituximab replace splenectomy in the management of splenic marginal zone lymphoma? Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2018;31:65e72.
73.	Marcus R, Davies A, Ando K, et al. Obinutuzumab for the first-line treatment of follicular lymphoma. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:1331e1344.
74.	 
Herold M, Hoster E, Janssens A, et al. Immunochemotherapy with obinutuzumab or rituximab in a subset of patients in the randomised GALLIUM trial with previously untreated marginal zone lymphoma (MZL). Hematol Oncol. 2017;35:146e147.
75.	Noy A, de Vos S, Thieblemont C, et al. Targeting Bruton tyrosine kinase with ibrutinib in relapsed/refractory marginal zone lymphoma. Blood. 2017;129:2224e2232.
76.	Dreyling M, Santoro A, Mollica L, et al. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibition by copanlisib in relapsed or refractory indolent lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:3898e3905.
77.	Copie-Bergman C, Wotherspoon AC, Capella C, et al. Gela histological scoring system for post-treatment biopsies of patients with gastric MALT lymphoma is feasible and reliable in routine practice. Br J Haematol. 2013;160:47e52.
78.	Nakamura S, Sugiyama T, Matsumoto T, et al. Long-term clinical outcome of gastric MALT lymphoma after eradication of Helicobacter pylori: a multicentre cohort follow-up study of 420 patients in Japan. Gut. 2012;61:507e513.
79.	Stathis A, Chini C, Bertoni F, et al. Long-term outcome following Hel- icobacter pylori eradication in a retrospective study of 105 patients with localized gastric marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of MALT type. Ann Oncol. 2009;20:1086e1093.
80.	Wundisch T, Thiede C, Morgner A, et al. Long-term follow-up of gastric MALT lymphoma after Helicobacter pylori eradication. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:8018e8024.
81.	Capelle LG, de Vries AC, Looman CW, et al. Gastric MALT lymphoma: epidemiology and high adenocarcinoma risk in a nation-wide study. Eur J Cancer. 2008;44:2470e2476.
82.	Wundisch T, Dieckhoff P, Greene B, et al. Second cancers and re- sidual disease in patients treated for gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma by Helicobacter pylori eradication and followed for 10 years. Gastroenterology. 2012;143:936e942. quiz e913e934.
83.	Saito Y, Suzuki H, Tsugawa H, et al. Overexpression of miR-142-5p and miR-155 in gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lym- phoma resistant to Helicobacter pylori eradication. PLoS One. 2012;7: e47396.
84.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33:139e144.
