
 
SPECIAL ARTICLE
 
Annals of Oncology 30: 1884–1901, 2019 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdz411
Published online 30 September 2019
 

 

 

O. Michielin1, A. C. J. van Akkooi2, P. A. Ascierto3, R. Dummer4 & U. Keilholz5, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Oncology, University Hospital Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; 2Department of Surgical Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute – Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 3Istituto Nazionale Tumori IRCCS Fondazione “G. Pascale”, Napoli, Italy; 4Department of Dermatology, Skin Cancer Centre, University Hospital Zu¨ rich, Zu¨ rich, Switzerland; 5Charite´ Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Charite´-Universita¨tsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland; E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: February 2002, last update September 2019.
This publication supersedes the previously published version—Ann Oncol 2015; 26 (Suppl 5): v126-v132.


Key words: cutaneous melanoma, clinical practice guidelines, diagnosis, treatment, follow-up



 

 
The European annual incidence of malignant melanoma varies from 3–5/100 000 in Mediterranean countries to 12–35/100 000 in Nordic countries, whereas it can reach over 50/100 000 in Australia or New Zealand. The incidence of melanoma has been rising steadily over the last 40 years, with a trend towards stabil- isation of mortality, except in elderly males [1]. Melanoma inci- dence peaks at 65 years, though any age can be affected [2]. There is an increase in the mortality-to-incidence ratios in Eastern com- pared with Western European countries, suggesting a need to im- prove prevention and early detection in Eastern Europe [3].
Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation was identified as a major carcino- gen involved in melanoma genesis. UV irradiation is associated with a distinct DNA damage signature and a high rate of muta- tions per megabase (Mb) [4]. The best prevention is physical pro- tection with adapted garments. In a randomised trial, prevention of UV exposure including the regular use of sunscreen has been shown to diminish the incidence of primary cutaneous melano- mas in an Australian population [5].


Diagnosis
Suspicious pigmented lesions are usually clinically analysed with the ‘ugly duckling’ concept and the ‘ABCD’ rule [6]: Asymmetry,
 
Border irregularities, Colour heterogeneity, Dynamics, (Dyna mics or evolution in colours, elevation or size). Today, many pri- mary melanomas have a diameter of <5 mm [7]. Dynamics (or evolution) is a very important criterion because it can also help to identify rapidly growing amelanotic melanomas in educated patients.
The ‘ugly duckling’ concept helps to identify melanomas, because naevi in the same individual tend to resemble one an- other and melanomas often do not fit the individuals naevus pat- tern [8].
Dermoscopy by an experienced physician enhances the diag- nostic accuracy [II, B] [9]. An automated videodermoscopy sys- tem can provide improved diagnostic accuracy for patients with multiple atypical naevi in the follow-up. Full body imaging with high-resolution pictures has also shown to improve early detec- tion [10].
Machine-learning algorithms trained on either standard or
dermatoscopic images have been shown to correctly diagnose pigmented skin lesions, with a success rate comparable to that of a panel of 21 board-certified dermatologists; though early results are very promising, their use in clinical practice remains to be evaluated [11]. The use of patient-operated diagnostic devices without medical supervision is presently not recommended.
Diagnosis should be based on a full thickness excisional biopsy
with a minimal side margin [V, A]. Processing of the primary tu- mour according to international guidelines and by an experi- enced pathology institute is mandatory.
 

VC   The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
The histology report should follow the eighth edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumour, node, metastasis (TNM) classification and include: the maximum thickness in millimetres (Breslow) reported to the nearest
0.1 mm (rounding up starting at 0.05), presence of ulceration and clearance of the surgical margins [II, A] [12]. Although no longer included in the eighth edition of the AJCC classification, mitotic rate and regression assessment and recording is recommended for all tumour thickness categories due to its important prognos- tic determinant when evaluated using its dynamic range across all melanomas [12].
Information on anatomical site (including extra-cutaneous sites, such as mucosa, conjunctiva) and degree of sun damage of the surrounding skin is necessary. It should also include the mel- anoma type [superficial spreading melanoma, lentigo maligna melanoma (LMM), acral lentiginous melanoma, nodular melan- oma, and others]. In rare situations, melanomas may derive from dermal melanocytes (melanoma arising from giant congenital naevus, malignant blue naevus and spitzoid lesions), which should be reported as well [13]. Atypical spitzoid tumours should be distinguished from spitzoid melanoma as they do not have a metastatic potential. In these melanomas, the prognostic rele- vance of tumour thickness and sentinel lymph node (SN) in- volvement is questionable.

Molecular characterisation
Mutation testing for actionable mutations is mandatory in patients with resectable or unresectable stage III or stage IV [I, A], and is highly recommended in high-risk resected disease stage IIC but not for stage I or stage IIA–IIB. BRAF testing is manda- tory [I, A]. If the tumour is BRAF wild-type (WT) at the V600 locus (class I BRAF mutant) sequencing the loci of the other known minor BRAF mutations (class II and class III BRAF mu- tant) to confirm WT status and testing for NRAS and c-kit muta- tions are recommended [II, C] [14]. Although no good targeted therapies options exist for these drivers at the moment, they are important to identify for future opportunities and to select patients for clinical trials. Alternatively, a clinically validated next-generation sequencing panel covering all key oncogenic drivers is increasingly being carried out. As drivers are actionable and can impact clinical decision, mutation analysis must be car- ried out in accredited (certified) institutes that have careful qual- ity controls.
The main melanoma subtypes are associated with different mutational landscapes: frequently mutated genes include [15]:
•	BRAF, CDKN2A, NRAS and TP53 in cutaneous melanoma,
•	BRAF, NRAS, NF1 and KIT in acral melanoma (though with lower frequencies than in cutaneous melanoma),
•	SF3B1 in mucosal melanoma.
In addition to the mutational status, programmed death- ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression, reported as the percentage of positive tumour cells, can be useful to assess and record for all resectable or unresectable stage III and IV [I, B], though its clinical use is very limited at this time (see below). Tumour mutational burden (TMB) computed on full exome sequenc- ing or on a large full length panel and expressed as the number
 
of mutations per Mb can be assessed and recorded [IV, C], though its clinical use is not warranted at this time [16].


 
Staging and risk assessment procedures are determined by disease presentation at diagnosis.
Physical examination with special attention to any suspicious pigmented lesions, tumour satellites, in-transit metastases (ITM), regional lymph node (LN) and systemic metastases is mandatory.
In low-risk melanomas (pT1a), no additional investigations are necessary. In the other T stages, pT1b-pT4b, ultrasound (US) for locoregional LN metastasis, and/or computed tomography (CT) or positron emission tomography (PET) scans as well as brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), represent options for tumour extension assessment before surgical treatment and SN biopsy (SNB). Brain   MRI   and   PET-CT/CT   scan   should be applied only for very high-risk patients (pT3b and higher [III, C]).
The eighth version of the AJCC staging and classification sys-
tem, which includes SN staging, is the preferred classification sys- tem (Table 1) [12].


 
Treatment of localised disease (primary tumours)
Wide local excision (WLE) of primary tumours with safety mar- gins of 0.5 cm for in situ melanomas, 1 cm for tumours with a thickness of up to 2 mm and 2 cm for thicker tumours, is recom- mended [II, B] (Table 2) [17]. Modifications, with reduced safety margins, are acceptable for preservation of function in acral and facial melanomas and can be carried out with Slow Mohs technique, although prospective randomised trials are missing [18, 19].
For lentigo maligna, radiotherapy (RT) can be curative and
represents an option to avoid unacceptable surgery [20]. Definitive RT to the primary tumour is only considered in (rare) palliative cases, when excision is not possible either due to severe comorbidities of the patient (i.e. very old age, end-stage cardio- vascular disease etc.) or when the morbidity of the excision is considered too great (i.e. extreme patient delay with a huge non- resectable local disease). RT is not curative in these settings.

Treatment of locoregional disease
A locoregional disease treatment algorithm is provided in Figure 1.
Elective lymph node dissection or primary elective irradiation to the regional LNs should not be carried out [II, B] [21–24]. Again, definitive irradiation can be considered in (rare) palliative cases.
SNB is recommended for precise staging in melanoma of AJCC eighth edition stage pT1b or higher, i.e. with a tumour thickness
 

Table 1. AJCC TNM eighth edition staging system of melanoma [12]
T—primary tumour
T category	

Primary tumour thickness cannot be assessed (e.g. diagnosis by curettage)
No evidence of primary tumour (e.g. unknown primary or completely regressed melanoma)	Thickness	Ulceration status
TX		Not applicable	Not applicable

T0		
Not applicable	
Not applicable

Tis (melanoma in situ)		
Not applicable	
Not applicable
T1
T1a		≤1.0 mm
<0.8 mm	Unknown or unspeciﬁed
Without ulceration
T1b		<0.8 mm	With ulceration
		0.8–1.0 mm	With or without ulceration
T2		>1.0–2.0 mm	Unknown or unspeciﬁed
T2a		>1.0–2.0 mm	Without ulceration
T2b		>1.0–2.0 mm	With ulceration
T3		>2.0–4.0 mm	Unknown or unspeciﬁed
T3a		>2.0–4.0 mm	Without ulceration
T3b		>2.0–4.0 mm	With ulceration
T4		>4.0 mm	Unknown or unspeciﬁed
T4a		>4.0 mm	Without ulceration
T4b		>4.0 mm	With ulceration
M—metastasis
M categorya		Anatomic site	LDH level
M0 M1
M1a		No evidence of distant metastasis Evidence of distant metastasis
Distant metastasis to skin, soft tissue includ- ing muscle and/or nonregional lymph
node	Not applicable See below
Not recorded or unspeciﬁed
M1a(0)
M1a(1)
M1b		

Distant metastasis to lung with or without M1a sites of disease	Not elevated Elevated
Not recorded or unspeciﬁed
M1b(0)
M1b(1)
M1c		

Distant metastasis to non-CNS visceral sites
with or without M1a or M1b sites of disease	Not elevated Elevated
Not recorded or unspeciﬁed
M1c(0)
M1c(1)
M1d		

Distant metastasis to CNS with or without M1a, M1b or M1c sites of disease	Not elevated Elevated
Not recorded or unspeciﬁed
M1d(0)
M1d(1)			Not elevated
Elevated
T	N	M	Pathological stage group
Tis	N0b	M0	0
T1a	N0	M0	IA
T1b	N0	M0	IA
T2a	N0	M0	IB
T2b	N0	M0	IIA
T3a	N0	M0	IIA
T3b	N0	M0	IIB
T4a	N0	M0	IIB
T4b	N0	M0	IIC
Continued
 

Table 1. Continued	
T	N	M	Pathological stage group
T0	N1b, N1c	M0	IIIB
T0	N2b, N2c, N3b or N3c	M0	IIIC
T1a/b–T2a	N1a or N2a	M0	IIIA
T1a/b–T2a	N1b/c or N2b	M0	IIIB
T2b/T3a	N1a–N2b	M0	IIIB
T1a–T3a	N2c or N3a/b/c	M0	IIIC
T3b/T4a	Any N ≥N1	M0	IIIC
T4b	N1a–N2c	M0	IIIC
T4b	N3a/b/c	M0	IIID
Any T, Tis	Any N	M1	IV

 
aSufﬁxes for M category: (0) LDH not elevated, (1) LDH elevated. No sufﬁx is used if LDH is not recorded or is unspeciﬁed.
bPathological stage 0 (melanoma in situ) and T1 do not require pathological evaluation of lymph nodes to complete pathological staging; use clinical N in- formation to assign their pathological stage.
AJCC, American Joint Committee on Cancer; CNS, central nervous system; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; TNM, tumour, node, metastasis. Reprinted from [12] with permission.


 

 



>0.8 mm or with a tumour thickness of <0.8 mm with ulceration [II, B] [25]. SNB is not recommended for pT1a melanomas [26].
In the Multicentre Selective Lympadenectomy Trial I (MSLT- I), there was no significant treatment-related difference between WLE/SN versus WLE/nodal observation in the 10-year follow-up melanoma-specific survival rate in patients with intermediate- thickness melanomas and thick primary melanomas [27]. A criticised subgroup analysis seemed to show a significant benefit for the node-positive patients in the SN arm compared with the node-positive patients in the observation arm. However, any false- positive negative patients or false-positive SN results were not taken into account. Another statistical method was developed on the interim data but was not externally validated [28, 29]. In sum- mary, the MSLT-I validated the staging potential of SNB but did not show any unequivocal survival benefit for this procedure. SNB should therefore not be considered as a therapeutic procedure.
SNB should be carried out only in experienced centres [30]. Quality criteria for centres performing SNB include the following [31]:
 

•	Review and comparison of primary histology with SNB is rec- ommended in difﬁcult cases.
•	Histology evaluation of the SNB according to cell morph- ology and immune proﬁle of the primary.
•	SNB procedure carried out simultaneously with the safety margins re-excision of the primary to avoid lymph drainage modiﬁcations.
•	SNB and re-excision carried out by an experienced surgical team.
•	Marking of the scar during the consultation, preferably with photo documentation.
•	Single-photon emission CT (SPECT) imaging in cases of un- clear sentinel LN localisation.
SN tumour burden has been assessed in different ways, and all different measures conclude that it adds to the accuracy of the prognosis [32, 33]. The most used and best reproducible method between pathologists has been the maximum diameter of the largest lesion (MDLL) according to the Rotterdam Criteria, which the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) has validated and adopted [34–36]. An MDLL cut-off of 1 mm has been used for adjuvant therapy trials. Therefore, though not formally part of the AJCC eighth edition evaluation, it is recommended to record the EORTC/Rotterdam criteria in the reporting of SN tumour burden.
Complete lymph node dissection (CLND) for SN-positive
patients was the standard of care until very recently. Following the MSLT-I trial, both the MSLT-II and the German Dermatologic Cooperative Oncology Group-selective lymphade- nectomy (DeCOG-SLT) trials analysed the benefit of performing routine CLND for SN-positive disease. Both studies reported no impact on survival for early CLND compared with nodal obser-
vation with periodic US of the SN-positive basin [37, 38]. CLND provides additional staging information, as ~15%–20% of SN- positive patients have additional non-SN involvement. However, upstaging occurs even less frequently at ~6% of cases. Therefore,
 
considering the morbidity of routine CLND, this practice can no longer be recommended [I, E] [39–41].
In the case of isolated locoregional clinically detectable (macroscopic, non-SN) LN metastases, therapeutic lymph node dissection is indicated [III, C]; removal of the tumour-bearing LN alone is insufficient [42].
However, before undertaking additional aggressive local surgi- cal treatments, a detailed staging investigation that includes high- resolution imaging techniques such as PET, CT or MRI is neces- sary to exclude distant metastases [III, B] [6]. Evidence of distant metastatic spread will preclude surgery and qualify the patient for systemic therapy (see below).

In-transit disease. Resectable satellite or ITM patients can be can- didates for surgery, though the advent of highly effective systemic therapies is now challenging such an approach as it is associated with the risk of rapid progression, jeopardising the chances of long-term benefit from systemic therapies.
Non-resectable satellite, ITM or inoperable primary tumours of the limbs, without additional metastases, may be treated with isolated limb perfusion using melphalan and/or tumour necrosis factor alpha [III, C]. Alternatively, talimogene laherparepvec (T- VEC) has shown an improved durable response rate compared with subcutaneous granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, especially in stage IIIB/C, IVM1a (AJCC seventh edition [43]) melanoma patients [44] [I, B]. These local procedures should be carefully weighed against systemic treatment, in order not to lower their chances in providing long-term benefit.
Such local treatments either require major surgery or experi- ence using oncolytic viruses and should therefore be restricted to experienced centres. Since their efficacy data are less established, RT, electrochemotherapy, carbon dioxide (CO2) laser or other intralesional therapy may also be proposed within clinical trials [V, D] [16, 45–47].

Adjuvant RT. Adjuvant RT for local tumour control can be con- sidered in cases of inadequate resection margins of LMM, in R1 resections (microscopic tumour at the margin) of melanoma metastases (only when second surgery is not adequate) or after re- section of bulky disease [III, B] [48]. A prospective randomised
trial has demonstrated that adjuvant irradiation after LN dissec- tion reduces the risk for relapse in the irradiation field by ~50%, but has no impact on recurrence-free survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS) [46]. Since local control is rarely the therapeutic
objective in melanoma, adjuvant RT can no longer routinely be recommended in the adjuvant setting [III, D]. It could still be dis- cussed in specific cases where local control is critical, such as in head and neck melanoma.

Adjuvant systemic therapy. Many well-designed clinical trials have investigated the impact of adjuvant therapy in patients with high-risk primary melanoma (stage IIB/C) or completely resected LN metastases (stage III).

Interferon alpha. A number of prospective randomised trials have investigated adjuvant treatment with low, intermediate and high doses of interferon alpha (IFNa) [49, 50].
A meta-analysis of 14 randomised controlled trials, investigat- ing adjuvant IFNa therapy involving 8122 patients, showed
 

 
Figure 1. Treatment algorithm for stage I–III melanoma.
aFor positive SND patients, avoiding CLND is justiﬁed based on the results of the MSLT-II and DeCOG-SLT trials. The control arm of both MSLT-II and DeCOG-SLT trials is not standard observation, but US- based follow-up, which should be the strategy proposed to the pa- tient [I, A].
bPlease refer to main text for a discussion on criteria to propose adju- vant treatment.
CLND, complete lymph node dissection; DeCOG-SLT, Dermatologic Cooperative Oncology Group-selective lymphadenectomy; MSLT, multicentre selective lymphadenectomy; SNB, sentinel lymph node biopsy; SND, sentinel lymph node dissection; US, ultrasound.


statistically significant absolute improvement in both disease-free survival (DFS) [hazard ratio (HR) 0.82] and OS (HR 0.89) [I, C], with no clear indication to specific dose or treatment duration and at the cost of significant toxicity [51].
Considering the most recent developments in adjuvant therapy (see below), adjuvant IFNa can no longer be routinely proposed in the adjuvant setting. Its use might be confined to particular set- tings like patients with an ulcerated stage IIc primary [52] and where the approved new drugs are not accessible.

Anti-cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4. Long-term therapy with ipilimumab, a monoclonal antibody blocking cyto- toxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) that pro- motes T cell priming against tumour cells, resulted in improved RFS (HR 0.75; median RFS 26.1 months versus 17.1 months, with 3-year RFS rates of 46.5% versus 34.8%, P ¼ 0.0013) in the adju-
vant setting compared with placebo in the EORTC 18071 trial [53]. The rate of OS at 5 years was 65.4% in the ipilimumab group, when compared with 54.4% in the placebo group (HR for death, 0.72; 95.1% CI 0.58–0.88; P ¼ 0.001). Contrary to results with IFNa, the benefit was also observed for N1b and higher stages. However, the treatment schedule at 10 mg/kg every 3 weeks for four doses, then every 3 months for up to 3 years, was
associated with a number of severe and some long-lasting adverse reactions, including colitis and endocrinopathies. Due to the tox- icity profile of anti-CTLA-4, anti-programmed cell death protein
 
1 (anti-PD-1) adjuvant therapy or dabrafenib/trametinib are the preferred treatment options [I, A] [54]. Ipilimumab has not been approved in the adjuvant setting in the EU by the European Medicines Agency (EMA).

Anti-PD-1. Adjuvant anti-PD-1, nivolumab has very recently shown a significant RFS benefit for stage IIIB/C, IV (AJCC sev- enth edition; [43]) resected melanoma when compared with ad- juvant high-dose ipilimumab, with an RFS HR of 0.66, 70% of patients free of relapse versus 60% at 12 months, 66% versus 53%
at 18 months and 63% versus 50% at 24 months, respectively [55]. The RFS HR is very consistent across stage subgroups with
0.68 for IIIB, 0.68 for IIIC and 0.66 for M1a/M1b [55]. Moreover, this adjuvant treatment with nivolumab had far fewer grade 3/4 adverse events compared with the very toxic high-dose ipilimu- mab; 14.4% versus 45.9%, respectively [56].
In addition, pembrolizumab has been evaluated against pla- cebo for stage IIIA (SN >1 mm), B and C (without ITM) within the EORTC 1325 trial [57]. At a median follow-up of 15 months,
pembrolizumab was associated with significantly longer RFS than placebo in the overall intention-to-treat population [1-year rate of RFS, 75.4% (95% CI 71.3–78.9) versus 61.0% (95% CI
56.5–65.1); HR for recurrence or death, 0.57; 98.4% CI 0.43–0.74;
P < 0.001)].
OS data are not currently available for nivolumab or
pembrolizumab.
Based on these RFS data and despite the lack of OS data, the EMA approved nivolumab [I, A; ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS) v1.1 score: A] and pembrolizumab [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: A] in the adjuvant setting in August and December 2018, respectively [see Table 3 (58–70)].

Targeted therapy. Efficacy of adjuvant targeted therapy has also been recently reported. The BRIM8 study analysed vemurafenib monotherapy versus a placebo in stage IIC and stage III (AJCC seventh edition [43]) melanoma after complete surgical resec- tion. The study did not meet its primary end point of DFS [71]. Therefore, BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi) monotherapy cannot be rec- ommended as adjuvant treatment for melanoma.
The COMBI-AD study, however, analysed dabrafenib/trameti- nib combination therapy versus two placebos in fully resected high-risk stage IIIA (with LN metastasis diameter >1 mm), IIIB or IIIC melanoma (AJCC seventh edition [43]). This study
showed a significantly improved estimated RFS of 58% versus 39% at 3 years (HR for relapse or death, 0.47; 95% CI 0.39–0.58; P < 0.001), as well as a numerically improved OS of 86% versus
77% (HR for death, 0.57; 95% CI 0.42–0.79; P ¼ 0.0006) [I, A]
[62]. The P value for the OS HR (0.0006) reported by Long et al.
[62] did not meet the prespecified boundary (0.000019). The combination of dabrafenib/trametinib is one of the standards of care for adjuvant BRAF-mutated melanoma and was approved by the EMA for adjuvant treatment for melanoma in August 2018 [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: A] (see Table 3).

Summary of recommendations in the adjuvant setting. Table 4 summarises the results from key trials in the adjuvant setting.
The data currently available establish both PD-1 blockade and dabrafenib/trametinib as recommended adjuvant treatments
 
options for stage IIIA (SN >1 mm), B and C for BRAF-mutated melanoma. Some of the current approvals include all stage III, re- gardless of SN deposit. Treatment decisions for stage IIIA SN
<1 mm should be made on an individual basis, considering the exact prognosis of the patient. This decision process will be dis- cussed in detail in the upcoming ‘ESMO Consensus Conference
Recommendations on Melanoma’ publication.
Additionally, results from CheckMate 238 suggest that nivolu- mab had benefits for stage IV no evidence of disease (NED) simi- lar to those of stage III, making it a clear option for this patient population [56]. Combination of nivolumab plus ipilimumab has shown very promising clinical activity compared to nivolu- mab in stage IV patients rendered NED by surgery or radiother- apy [72] though with increased toxicity.
The added toxicity and the lower efficacy of ipilimumab no longer warrants its use in the adjuvant setting.
In BRAF WT patients, PD-1 blockade is the only recom- mended option.
For BRAF-mutated melanoma, as there is no direct efficacy comparison between dabrafenib/trametinib versus PD-1 block- ade, individual treatment decisions should be made with the pa- tient, factoring in the toxicity profiles.
Contrary to the initial EORTC 18071 ipilimumab trial, HRs for RFS are robust and consistent across the various subgroups for the PD-1 trial, EORTC 1325 and CheckMate 238, and the dabra- fenib/trametinib trial, COMBI-AD [62]. This suggests that the benefit from PD-1 or dabrafenib/trametinib could be similar in lower, not yet evaluated, subgroups, such as some stage II. Indeed, the risk of relapse for SN-negative pT3b, pT4a and pT4b
melanoma is quite high, with a mortality of ~20% at 10-year follow-up [12]. Therefore, such patients should be considered a
priority for adjuvant stage II clinical trials.


   Management of advanced/metastatic 
 
 
Surgical or ablative treatment of resectable stage IV
Some stage IV patients present with a resectable, oligometastatic disease. Although the value of complete surgery or ablative radiosurgery in such a clinical setting has not been validated in phase III prospective studies, data from phase II are available [73]. Surgical removal or stereotactic irradiation of locoregional recurrence or single distant metastasis should be considered in fit patients, as a therapeutic option, offering potential for long-term disease control [III, C]. Surgery remains an option for selected patients, preferentially combined with adjuvant systemic thera- pies [see section on adjuvant systemic therapy].

Systemic treatment of unresectable stage III and IV disease
The therapeutic landscape of unresectable stage III and IV melan- oma has been revolutionised by immunotherapies and targeted therapies. Both strategies have shown markedly improved sur- vival compared with the use of chemotherapy (ChT) regimens.
 
Table 3. ESMO-MCBS table for new therapies/indications in melanomaa

 
Therapy	Disease setting	Trial	Control	Absolute survival gain
 
HR (95% CI)	QoL/toxicity	ESMO-MCBS
scoreb
 

Nivolumab with ipilimumab
 

First-line advanced or metastatic melanoma
 

Phase 3 Study of Nivolumab or Nivolumab Plus Ipilimumab Versus Ipilimumab Alone in Previously Untreated Advanced Melanoma (CheckMate 067)
[58, 59]
Phase III NCT01844505
 

Ipilimumab PFS: 2.9 months
OS: 19.9 months
3-year OS: 34%
 

PFS gain: 8.6 months 3-year OS gain: 24%
 

PFS HR: 0.42 (0.35–
0.51)
OS HR: 0.55 (0.44–0.68)
 

4 (Form 2a)
 
Nivolumab	First-line advanced or metastatic melanoma
 
Phase 3 Study of Nivolumab or Nivolumab Plus Ipilimumab Versus Ipilimumab Alone in Previously Untreated Advanced Melanoma (CheckMate 067)
[58, 59]
Phase III NCT01844505
 
Ipilimumab PFS: 2.9 months
OS: 19.9 months
3-year OS: 34%
 
PFS gain: 4 months OS gain: 17.7 months 3-year OS gain: 18%
 
PFS HR: 0.53 (0.44–
0.64)
OS HR: 0.65 (0.53–0.79)
 
4 (Form 2a)
 
Cobimetinib with vemurafenib
 
First-line unresectable or metastatic mel- anoma with the BRAF V600E
mutation
 
A Study Comparing Vemurafenib Versus Vemurafenib Plus Cobimetinib in Participants With Metastatic Melanoma
[60]
Phase III NCT01689519
 
Vemurafenibþplacebo
PFS: 7.2 months
OS: 17.4 months
 
PFS gain: 5.1 months OS gain: 4.9 months
 
PFS HR: 0.58 (0.46–
0.72)
OS HR: 0.70 (0.55–0.90)
 
9% reduction skin cancer
 
4 (Form 2a)
 
Ipilimumab	Adjuvant stage III melanoma
 
Efﬁcacy Study of Ipilimumab Versus Placebo to Prevent Recurrence After Complete Resection of High Risk Stage III Melanoma
[53]
Phase III NCT00636168
 
Placebo OS: 54.40%
 
Primary outcome 5- year DFS
OS gain: 11%
 
OS HR: 0.76 (0.64–0.89)	A (Form 1)
 
Trametinib with dabrafenib
 
First-line unresectable or metastatic mel- anoma with the BRAF V600 mutation following complete resection
 
Dabrafenib Plus Trametinib vs Vemurafenib Alone in Unresectable or Metastatic BRAF V600E/K Cutaneous Melanoma
[61]
Phase III NCT01597908
 
Vemurafenib PFS: 7.3 months
OS: 1-year survival 65%
 
PFS gain: 4.1 months OS gain: 1-year sur-
vival 7%
 
PFS HR: 0.56 (0.46–
0.69)
OS HR: 0.69 (0.53–0.89)
 
17% reduction skin cancer
 
4 (Form 2b)








Continued
 




Table 3. Continued
Therapy	Disease setting	Trial	Control	Absolute survival gain

RFS gain: 27.9 months 3-year RFS gain: 19%





PFS gain: 3.3 months






RFS gain at 1 year: 14.40%







RFS gain at 1 year: 9.7%	HR (95% CI)	QoL/toxicity









QoL improved
















Fewer treatment- related grade 3 or 4 adverse events 14.4% versus 45.9%	ESMO-MCBS
						scoreb
Dabrafenib in combin-	Adjuvant treatment of Dabrafenib With Trametinib in	Placebo		RFS HR: 0.47 (0.39–		A (Form 1)
ation with trametinib	melanoma after sur-	the Adjuvant Treatment of	RFS: 16.6 months		0.58)		
	gical resection with	High-risk BRAF V600 Mutation-	3-year RFS: 39%				
	BRAF V600 mutation	positive Melanoma (COMBI-AD)					
	[62, 63]
				
	Phase III					
	NCT01682083					
Trametinib as	Unresectable or meta- GSK1120212 vs Chemotherapy in	Dacarbazine or paclitaxel		PFS HR: 0.45 (0.33–		4 (Form 2b)
monotherapy	static melanoma	Advanced or Metastatic BRAF	PFS (crossover allowed):		0.63)		
	with a BRAF V600E/	V600 E/K Mutation-positive	1.5 months		OS HR: not signiﬁcant		
	K mutation	Melanoma					
	[64–67]
				
	Phase III					
	NCT01245062					
Pembrolizumab	Adjuvant treatment of Study of Pembrolizumab (MK-	Placebo		RFS HR: 0.57 (0.43–		A (Form 1)
	adults with stage III	3475) Versus Placebo After	RFS at 1 year: 61%		0.74)		
	melanoma and	Complete Resection of High-					
	lymph node in-	Risk Stage III Melanoma (MK-					
	volvement after	3475-054/1325-MG/KEYNOTE-					
	complete resection	054)					
	[57]
				
	Phase III					
	NCT02362594					
Nivolumab	Adult patients with	Efﬁcacy Study of Nivolumab	Ipilimumab 10 mg/kg		RFS HR: 0.66 (0.53–		A (Form 1)
	complete resection	Compared to Ipilimumab in	RFS at 1 year: 60.8%		0.81)		
	of stage IIIB/C or IV	Prevention of Recurrence of					
	melanoma	Melanoma After Complete					
	Resection of Stage IIIb/c or					
	Stage IV Melanoma (CheckMate					
	238)					
	[56]
				
	Phase III					
	NCT02388906					
Continued
 
Table 3. Continued	
Therapy	Disease setting	Trial	Control	Absolute survival gain	HR (95% CI)	QoL/toxicity	ESMO-MCBS
scoreb
Binimetinib with	Adult patients with	Study Comparing Combination of	Vemurafenib	PFS gain: 7.6 months	PFS HR: 0.51 (0.39–	QoL not published as	4 (Form 2a)
encorafenib	unresectable or	LGX818 Plus MEK162 Versus	PFS: 7.3 months	OS gain: 16.7 months	0.67)	full paper	
metastatic melan-	Vemurafenib and LGX818	OS: 16.9 months	OS HR: 0.61 (0.47–0.79) oma with the BRAF	Monotherapy in BRAF Mutant
V600 mutation		Melanoma [68, 69]
Phase III NCT01909453
 
aEMA approvals since January 2016.
bESMO-MCBS version 1.1 [70]. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee.
CI, conﬁdence interval; DFS, disease-free survival; EMA, European Medicines Agency; HR, hazard ratio; ESMO-MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; OS, overall survival; PFS, progression-free survival; QoL, quality of life; RFS, recurrence-free survival.

 

 

 
Despite progress in treatment of advanced disease, many ques- tions remain unanswered, and for the majority of melanoma patients, prognosis remains poor. Inclusion in clinical trials remains, therefore, the number one priority in all settings.
Systemic treatment algorithms for stage IV are provided in Figures 2–4 (see also Table 5).

First-line treatment. The current first-line standard of care treat- ments for unresectable stage III/IV are PD-1 blockade (nivolu- mab, pembrolizumab), PD-1 blockade (nivolumab) combined with CTLA-4 blockade (ipilimumab) and, in addition for BRAF V600-mutated melanoma [II, B], BRAF inhibition (vemurafenib, dabrafenib, encorafenib) combined with MEK inhibition (cobi- metinib, trametinib, binimetinib) [60]. For unresectable stage IIIB/C, IVM1a (AJCC seventh edition [43]), talimogene laher- parepvec (T-VEC) is also an option [I, B] (see ‘In-transit disease’ section above).
Superiority of nivolumab compared with dacarbazine (DTIC)
ChT has been demonstrated for BRAF WT melanoma patients in the CheckMate 066, prospective, randomised, first-line trial, with an HR for death of 0.42; 99.79% CI 0.25–0.73; P < 0.001 and an HR for death or progression of disease of 0.43; 95% CI 0.34–0.56;
P < 0.001 [I, A] [74]. Superiority of PD-1 (nivolumab, pembroli- zumab) compared with ipilimumab has been shown in two pro-
spective randomised trials, CheckMate 067 and KEYNOTE-006 [58, 75]. CheckMate 067 has an HR for death for nivolumab ver- sus ipilimumab of 0.65 (P < 0.001). KEYNOTE-006 has an HR for death for pembrolizumab q2w (10 mg/kg every 2 weeks) ver-
sus ipilimumab of 0.63 (P < 0.001) and an HR for pembrolizu- mab q3w (10 mg/kg every 3 weeks) versus ipilimumab of 0.69 (P < 0.001) [58, 75]. Based on these trials, PD-1 blockade is now a standard of care for all patients, regardless of their BRAF status,
in the first-line setting [I, A].
 

 
Figure 2. Treatment algorithm for inoperable stage III and IV BRAF
WT melanoma.
aIO rechallenge can be ipilimumab if not given previously, nivolu- mab or pembrolizumab if another line of treatment was given after IO failure [II, B], or ipilimumab/nivolumab if not given previously [IV, B]. As described in the main text, treatment beyond progression might be an option for selected patients [IV, C].
CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4; IO, immuno- oncology; PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1; T-VEC, talimogene laherparepvec; WT, wild-type.


The benefit of adding ipilimumab to nivolumab has been assessed in the CheckMate 067 study. The nivolumab and ipili- mumab combination arm resulted in numerically higher re- sponse rates, response durations, time to subsequent therapies, progression-free survival (PFS) and OS [58]. These numerical differences are maintained in the 4-year survival update [59]. By study design, the two nivolumab-containing arms cannot be compared due to insufficient power. Despite all end points nu- merically favouring the combination, the OS gain appears limited
 

 

 




Figure 3. Treatment algorithm for inoperable stage III and IV BRAF- mutated melanoma.
aIO rechallenge can be ipilimumab if not given previously, nivolu- mab or pembrolizumab if another line of treatment was given after IO failure [II, B], or ipilimumab/nivolumab again if not given previous- ly [IV, B]. As described in the main text, treatment beyond progres- sion might be an option for selected patients [IV, C].
BRAFi, BRAF inhibitor; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4; IO, immuno-oncology; MEKi, MEK inhibitor; PD-1, pro- grammed cell death protein 1; T-VEC, talimogene laherparepvec; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor.

and biomarkers are needed to better select patients that benefit from the combination. PD-L1 provides an imperfect biomarker. Indeed, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses show that PD-L1 enriches only marginally the prediction com- pared with random assignment arguing for its limited value with an area under the curve (AUC) of only 0.56 (see supplementary Figure S1, available at Annals of Oncology online) [58].
Some clinical parameters could provide interesting biomarkers to select patients with the highest benefit from the combination, including asymptomatic brain metastases (BMs) that demon- strate an improved PFS and >50% (10 out of 20) response rate
with the combination  compared with 21% (4 out of 19) for
single-agent nivolumab in treatment-naive patients [II, A] [76], or elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) with a PFS/OS HR of 0.69/0.73 favouring the combination in patient with LDH >2×
upper limit of normal [58, 77], though evidence for the latter is
weaker [III, B].
Current treatment decisions are, therefore, based on several parameters and need to be individualised to the patient when selecting between nivolumab and the combination.
In case of BRAF-mutated melanoma, additional first-line options are provided by BRAF and MEK inhibition. BRAF/MEK double inhibition is superior to single-agent BRAF in terms of re- sponse rates, PFS and OS [61, 78, 79]. In addition to improved
 
Figure 4. Treatment algorithm for inoperable stage III and IV NRAS- mutated melanoma.
aIO rechallenge can be ipilimumab if not given previously, nivolu- mab or pembrolizumab if another line of treatment was given after IO failure [II, B], or ipilimumab/nivolumab again if not given previous- ly [IV, B]. As described in the main text, treatment beyond progres- sion might be an option for selected patients [IV, C].
CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4; IO, immuno- oncology; MEKi, MEK inhibitor; PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1; T-VEC, talimogene laherparepvec.

efficacy, skin-related side-effects are reduced with the combin- ation, though MEK inhibition adds specific toxicities (e.g. muscle, heart, eye). Single-agent BRAFis should be used only in case of an absolute contraindication for MEK inhibitors (MEKis).
First-line decision between targeted therapies or immuno- therapies is currently being studied in prospective trials (SECOMBIT, NCT02631447) to define the best sequencing com- bination treatment in terms of OS, the primary efficacy variable. No direct randomised comparison exists between the two approaches, but meta-analyses suggest that, despite better out- come within the first 12 months for targeted therapies, immuno- therapy patients may have a better survival after 1 year [68, 80, 81]. Patients for whom immunotherapy can be delivered safely for the first few months, i.e. patients with tumours not progress- ing very quickly and not immediately threatening an important organ or function, should be considered for immunotherapy first, preserving targeted therapies for the subsequent lines.
For NRAS-mutated melanoma, due to the limited efficacy of MEKis [82], first-line immunotherapy options identical to those of WT melanoma are the first choice (see Figure 4).
For other drivers such as cKIT or NF1, targeted therapies are of limited activity and first-line immunotherapy options identical to those of WT melanoma are also the first choice. In second-line some specific c-Kit mutations suggest a treatment attempt with imatinib or nilotinib [83].
Several simple clinical and laboratory parameters provide pre- dictive and prognostic markers, like the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS), LDH levels
 
and the number of metastatic sites. They are negative prognostic and predictive markers for both targeted and immunotherapies [84–86].

Treatment beyond progression. Some retrospective data show that treatment beyond progression can be an option in selected patients both on targeted as well as on immunotherapies [87]. Important biases are expected from these analyses as the decision to treat beyond progression is linked to patient’s overall status. No randomised data are available at this time.

 
Second-line treatment. Standard-of-care second-line selection depends on the strategy used for the first-line and the mutational status of the disease. Clinical trials should always be considered when available.
For BRAF WT disease, second-line options are very limited and inclusion in clinical trials and/or personalised approaches could be discussed. If the first-line treatment was anti-PD-1 alone, ipilimumab is an option [II, B] as well as ipilimumab/nivo- lumab [IV, B] [88, 89]. In some cases, ChT with DTIC or temozo- lomide can be discussed as a bridging therapy.
For BRAF-mutated disease, all the options available for WT melanoma are still valid with the addition of BRAFis/MEKis if not used in the first-line setting. BRAFis/MEKis should not be used too late in the course of the disease, as clinical parameters associated with disease progression, such as LDH, number of metastatic sites and ECOG PS represent strong negative predict- ive biomarkers [I, A] [85].
In NRAS-mutated melanoma, MEKis have a limited activity, providing improved PFS with an mPFS of 2.8 months for binime- tinib compared with 1.5 for dacarbazine (HR for PFS 0.62,
P < 0.001) [82]. cKIT targeting has shown limited activity, though more recent and potent KIT inhibitors are being tested
[83]. In the absence of positive phase III data, KIT inhibition remains an option in this molecular subgroup.

Subsequent lines. Subsequent lines of therapy are not evidence- based at this time. Clinical trials or rechallenge, either with tar- geted or immunotherapies, can be an option [90] (see Figure 2). ChT with DTIC or temozolomide or other drugs remains an al- ternative for palliation or as a bridging therapy [II, C].
 








Figure 5. Treatment algorithm for asymptomatic brain metastases (BMs).
This algorithm is restricted to asymptomatic BMs. In case of symptom- atic BMs, strategies can be signiﬁcantly modiﬁed due to the use of ste- roids that can hamper the efﬁcacy of IO treatments or due to additional modalities like neuro-surgery. Such an algorithm should be adapted to the general condition of the patient, e.g. progressing vis- ceral metastasis requiring systemic treatment adaptation, or previous lines of treatment, e.g. patients developing BMs during adjuvant treat- ment and where a change of systemic treatment might be warranted.
aFor patients with small number of asymptomatic metastases (<5– 10), non-bulky disease (<3 cm), SRS up front is an option. Other patients should be considered for systemic treatment ﬁrst, keeping
SRS for the treatment of non-responding lesions.
bFor patients failing systemic treatment, SRS could be considered as a salvage therapy if the total number of progressing lesions is <5–10 and their maximal size <3 cm.
BRAFi, BRAF inhibitor; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated anti-
gen 4; IO, immuno-oncology; MEKi, MEK inhibitor; PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1; SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery; WT, wild-type.


been fully determined, but recent results can help with decision-
 
Management of difficult clinical situations: BMs
Management of BMs is particularly challenging, as brain involve- ment usually dictates a negative outcome for melanoma patients. Therefore, these patients need careful interdisciplinary care in specialised referral centres.
Recent studies confirmed that the preferred systemic treat- ments, targeted therapies and immunotherapies, can be safely and efficiently applied in BM patients. Thus, four modalities have to be considered and applied depending on the individuals’ needs: neurosurgery, stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS), targeted therapy with BRAFi/MEKi combination, as well as immuno- therapies. Whole-brain RT (WBRT) should be avoided whenever possible for its lack of efficacy and long-term toxicities that can no longer be justified in the light of the new PFS milestones obtained by combination immunotherapies [91] (see below). The optimal sequence or combination of these modalities has not
 
making until ongoing clinical trials bring more definitive answers.
Dabrafenib/trametinib combination therapy was investigated in a prospective, multicentre, multicohort, open-label, phase II clinical trial (COMBI-MB) with good ECOG PS of 0 or 1 [92]. The response rate of 58% in asymptomatic untreated BMs is similar to the response rate in other organ sites. However, PFS with a median at 5.6 months seems to be shorter than the
11.0 months median PFS reported in COMBI-d [78].
Immunotherapy with anti-PD-1 monotherapy or ipilimumab plus nivolumab has been investigated in patients with BMs. The outcomes are in favour of the combination with an overall re- sponse rate of 46% in patients with asymptomatic BMs, reason-
able response duration and PFS of >50% at 18 months [76, 93]. Importantly, the inclusion criteria in these trials are strict which
resulted in a selection of patients with low central nervous system (CNS)   tumour   burden.   These   results   suggest,   however,
 

Table 5. Treatment modalities for melanoma metastases
Metastases localisation, number (pathological stage)	Treatment modalitiesa	GoR

 
Few ITMs	Surgical removal	C
(pTXN2cM0)	T-VEC	C
	Irradiation, electrochemotherapy	D
Multiple ITMs (>5; pTXN2cM0)	T-VEC	B
Systemic therapyb	C
Perfusion of the extremityb	C
	Electrochemotherapy	D
Locoregional LNs (pTxN1a, 2a, N3a)
Locoregional LNs (pTxN1bN2b, N2c, 3)	Consider adjuvant therapy	A
Consider trial participation	B
Complete surgical removal followed by adjuvant therapy	A
Irradiation in case of incomplete resection	C
	Consider trial participation
Solitary CNS metastases (pTxNxM3)	Stereotactic irradiationb	B
Systemic treatment	B
Neurosurgical removal	C
	Consider clinical trial participation
Solitary lung, liver, kidney and other metastases (pTxNxM1)	Systemic therapyb	A
Surgical removal	C
Stereotactic irradiation	C
	Consider clinical trial participation
Multiple metastases (pTxNxM1a-1c)
Painful bone metastases (pTxNxM1a-1c)	Systemic therapyb	A
Consider clinical trial participation
Radiotherapy	B
Bone-modifying agents	C
Consider clinical trial participation

 
aTreatment modalities are presented in order of preference.
bThese therapies should be preferentially carried out at specialised centres.
CNS, central nervous system; GoR, grade of recommendation; ITM, in-transit metastasis; LN, lymph node; T-VEC, talimogene laherparepvec.

 
ipilimumab/nivolumab combination therapy as the preferred first-line treatment also in BRAF-mutated asymptomatic patients [III, A]. Importantly, efficacy of ipilimumab/nivolumab combin- ation seems to be lower in patients with symptomatic BMs with only 22% [94] or 21% intracranial responses on a limited cohort of patients [76].
Since multiple sessions of SRS can be combined with systemic targeted or immunotherapies, close disease monitoring by MRI is recommended in order to add SRS when indicated. For patients with a small number of asymptomatic metastases (<5–10), non-
bulky disease (<3 cm), SRS up front is an option. Other patients
should be considered for systemic treatment first, keeping SRS
for the treatment of non-responding lesions. For patients failing systemic treatment, SRS could be considered as a salvage therapy if the total number of progressing lesions is <5–10 and their max-
imal size <3cm. First real world data show interesting results
between SRS and systemic treatment [95]. Toxicity should also
be factored in the decision as data suggest increased risk of symp- tomatic radio-necrosis with immunotherapies [96]. The place of SRS in the rapidly evolving landscape of systemic treatment must be determined prospectively and several clinical trials are ongoing like the ABC-X trial (NCT03340129) to answer these questions.
 
Patients with BMs in whom local therapy has failed, or who have neurological symptoms requiring steroids or leptomenin- geal disease, infrequently respond to ipilimumab/nivolumab [76, 94]. This population can be treated by WBRT, even in the case of leptomeningeal disease or very extensive disease, and systemically with BRAFi/MEKi in BRAF-mutated or temozolomide in BRAF WT patients. Nevertheless, the prognosis of this population is ex- tremely poor and palliative care must be discussed and prepared.
A summary of the management of BMs is provided in Figure 5.

Management of toxicities
Management of toxicities from systemic therapies are well docu- mented. Good references exist for immunotherapies [97] as well as for mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors [98].


 
Biomarkers such as mutations (BRAF, NRAS, c-Kit) are already indispensable today for proper management of advanced melan- oma. Other mutations and the TMB might be additional
 
Table 6. Summary of recommendations

Diagnosis and pathology/molecular biology
•	Diagnosis should be based on a full thickness excisional biopsy with a small side margin [V, A]
•	The histology report should include at least information on the type of melanoma, actinic damage, maximum vertical thickness in millimetres, informa- tion on mitotic rate, presence of ulceration, presence and extent of regression and clearance of the surgical margins [II, A]
•	Mutation testing for actionable mutations is mandatory in patients with resectable or unresectable stage III or stage IV and is highly recommended in
high-risk resected disease stage IIC but not for stage I or stage IIA–IIB [I, A]. BRAF testing is mandatory [I, A]
Staging and risk assessment
•	Physical examination with special attention to other suspicious pigmented lesions, tumour satellites, ITMs, regional LNs and distant metastases is man- datory. In higher tumour stages, US, CT and/or PET scans are recommended in order to allow proper tumour assessment [III, C]
Management of local/locoregional disease
•	Wide local excision of primary tumours with safety margins of 0.5 cm for in situ melanomas, 1 cm for tumours with a tumour thickness up to 2 mm and 2 cm for thicker tumours is recommended [II, B]
•	SNB is recommended for all patients with pT1b or higher according to the AJCC eighth edition TNM staging system [II, B]
•	CLND is not recommended for SN-positive patients [I, E]. In the case of isolated locoregional clinically detectable (macroscopic, non-SN) LN metastases, CLND is indicated [III, C]; removal of the tumour-bearing LN alone is insufﬁcient
•	Patients with resected stage III melanomas should be evaluated for adjuvant therapy
•	Adjuvant RT for local tumour control can be considered in cases of inadequate resection margins of LMM, in R1 resections or after resection of bulky disease [III, B]. Adjuvant RT is not recommended in the adjuvant setting [III, D]
•	Anti-PD-1 adjuvant therapy, nivolumab [l, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: A], pembrolizumab [l, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: A] or dabrafenib/trametinib [l, A;
ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score A] are the preferred treatment options
Management of advanced/metastatic disease
•	Surgical removal or stereotactic irradiation of locoregional recurrence or single distant metastasis should be considered in ﬁt patients, as a therapeutic option, offering potential for long-term disease control [III, C]
•	Patients with metastatic melanoma should have metastasis (preferably) or the primary tumour screened for detection of BRAF V600 mutation treatment
options for the ﬁrst- and second-line settings include anti-PD-1 antibodies (pembrolizumab, nivolumab), PD-1 and ipilimumab for all patients, and BRAFi/ MEKi combination for patients with BRAF-mutated melanoma [II, B]
•	For unresectable stage IIIB/C, IVM1a, T-VEC is also an option [I, B]
•	PD-1 blockade or PD-1 and ipilimumab are now a standard of care for all patients, regardless of their BRAF status, in the ﬁrst-line setting [I, A]
•	For BRAF WT disease, second-line options are very limited and inclusion in clinical trials and/or personalised approaches could be discussed. If the ﬁrst- line treatment was anti-PD-1 alone, ipilimumab is an option [II, B] as well as ipilimumab/nivolumab [IV, B]
•	For BRAF-mutated disease, all the options available for WT melanoma are still valid with the addition of BRAFis/MEKis if not used in the ﬁrst-line setting
•	For NRAS-mutated melanoma, due to the limited efﬁcacy of MEK inhibitors, ﬁrst-line immunotherapy options identical to those of WT melanoma are the ﬁrst choice
•	If clinical trials or the approved new compounds are not available, cytotoxic drugs such as DTIC or temozolomide may be administered, with modest
activity shown [II, C]
•	For management of brain metastases, study results suggest, ipilimumab/nivolumab combination therapy as the preferred ﬁrst-line treatment also in
BRAF-mutated asymptomatic patients [III, A]. For patients with a small number of asymptomatic metastases (<5–10), non-bulky disease (<3 cm), SRS up front is an option. Other patients should be considered for systemic treatment ﬁrst, keeping SRS for the treatment of non-responding lesions. For patients failing systemic treatment, SRS could be considered as a salvage therapy if the total number of progressing lesions is <5–10 and their maximal size
<3 cm
Follow-up, long-term implications and survivorship
•	Melanoma patients should be instructed in the avoidance of sunburns, extended unprotected solar or artiﬁcial UV exposure, and in lifelong regular self- examinations of the skin and peripheral LNs [III, B]
•	Patients must be aware that family members have an increased melanoma risk [III, B]
•	During melanoma follow-up, patients are clinically monitored in order to detect a relapse and to recognise additional skin tumours, especially second- ary melanomas, as early as possible [III, B]
•	There is no consensus on optimal schedule, follow-up or the utility of imaging and blood tests for patients with resected melanoma; recommendations
vary from follow-up visits every 3 months, during the ﬁrst 3 years and every 6–12 months thereafter, to no organised follow-up at all
•	SN-positive patients should be followed by regular US examinations
•	Rising levels of serum S100 protein is the most accurate blood test in the follow-up of melanoma patients, if any blood test is recommended at all [IV, D]

AJCC, American Joint Committee on Cancer; BRAFi, BRAF inhibitor; CLND, complete lymph node dissection; CT, computed tomography; DTIC, dacarbazine; ESMO-MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; ITM, in-transit metastases; LMM, lentigo maligna melanoma; LN, lymph node; MEKi, MEK inhibitor; PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1; PET, positron emission tomography; R1, microscopic tumour at the margin; RT, radiotherapy; SN, sentinel node; SNB, sentinel node biopsy; SRS, stereotactic radiosurgery; T-VEC, talimogene laherparepvec; TNM, tumour, node, metastasis; US, ultrasound; UV, ultraviolet; WT, wild-type.
 

 


molecular predictive markers in the near future. PD-L1 has been shown to provide an imperfect predictive biomarker for im- munotherapy. Determining the optimal cut-off in melanoma proves challenging and, assessed rigorously with a proper ROC analysis [58], PD-L1 staining has very little predictive value with an AUC of 0.56 for ipilimumab/nivolumab and 0.57 for nivolu- mab alone.
The authors anticipate that treatment algorithms for advanced melanoma could evolve in a paradigm for precision oncology, where both targeted and immunotherapies are used sequentially or simultaneously according to a highly personalised strategy.


   Follow-up, long-term implications and   
 
 
Melanoma patients need instructions in avoidance of sunburns, extended unprotected solar or artificial UV exposure, and in life- long regular self-examinations of the skin and peripheral LNs [III, B]. Patients must be aware that family members have an increased melanoma risk [III, B]. There is no recommendation for genetic testing.
During melanoma follow-up, patients are clinically monitored in order to detect a relapse and to recognise additional skin tumours, especially secondary melanomas, as early as possible [III, B] [6]. However, it remains to be determined whether this strategy leads to improved survival rates, especially in this new
 
era of systemic therapies for stage IV disease. Eight percent of all melanoma patients develop a secondary melanoma within 2 years of the initial diagnosis [99]. Melanoma patients also have an increased risk for other skin tumours. In patients with LMM, 35% of patients develop another cutaneous malignancy within 5 years [48].
There is currently no consensus on the frequency of follow-up examinations and the use of imaging techniques and blood tests for patients with resected melanoma. Recommendations vary from follow-up visits every 3 months, during the first 3 years and every 6–12 months thereafter, to no organised follow-up at all. The authors encourage consultation of the respective national guidelines. Intervals between clinical visits and imaging exams may be tailored according to individual risk and personal needs of the patient [100].
Since patients with a thin primary melanoma have only a small risk of relapse, routine imaging techniques are definitively not recommended for this patient population. In high-risk patients,
e.g. those with thick primary tumours, or following treatment of metastases, US of LNs, CT or whole-body PET/PET-CT scans may lead to an earlier diagnosis of regional or systemic relapses [101]. The impact of radiological exams upon survival has not been demonstrated so far [102]. However, targeted therapy and immunotherapy demonstrate favourable effects in patients with low tumour burden, who can be identified by high-resolution imaging during follow-up. Rising levels of serum S100 protein has a higher specificity for disease progression than LDH, and is, therefore, the most accurate blood test in the follow-up of melan- oma patients [103], if any blood test is recommended at all [IV, D].


 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development http://www.esmo.org/ Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The relevant litera- ture has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of rec- ommendations is shown in Table 6. An ESMO-MCBS table with MCBS scores is included in Table 3. ESMO-MCBS v1.1 [70] was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA since 1 January 2016. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee. Levels of evidence and grades of recom- mendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 7. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO faculty. This manu- script has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.

 
The ESMO Guidelines Committee would like to thank the ESMO Faculty and other experts who provided critical reviews of these ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. They would also like to thank the European Cancer Patient Coalition and the fol- lowing patient organisations for their review: Stichting Melanoom and Melanoma Patient Network Europe.
 
 
No external funding has been received for the preparation of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.


 
OM has reported research funding from Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche and consultant or advis- ory board with Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Amgen, Roche and GlaxoSmithKline; AVA has reported research funding from Amgen and Novartis and consultant or advisory board with Amgen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Merck – Pfizer; PA has reported re- search funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche-Genentech and Array and consultant or advisory board with Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche-Genentech, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Array, Novartis, Amgen, Merck Serono, Pierre Fabre, Incyte, Genmab, Newlink Genetics, Medimmune, AstraZeneca and Syndax; RD has reported research funding from Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche and GlaxoSmithKline and consultant or advisory board with Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Amgen, Roche, Sun Pharma and Takeda; UK has reported research funding from Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche, GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca and Merck Serono and consult- ant or advisory board with, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol- Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, Merck Serono and Glaxo SmithKline.

 
1.	Hollestein LM, van den Akker SAW, Nijsten T et al. Trends of cutane- ous melanoma in The Netherlands: increasing incidence rates among all Breslow thickness categories and rising mortality rates since 1989. Ann Oncol 2012; 23(2): 524–530.
2.	National Cancer Registration and Analysis Service, Public Health England, https://www.cancerresearchuk.org (15 October 2019, date last accessed).
3.	Forsea AM, Del Marmol V, Stratigos A, Geller AC. Melanoma prognosis in Europe: far from equal. Br J Dermatol 2014; 171(1): 179–182.
4.	Alexandrov LB, Nik-Zainal S, Wedge DC et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature 2013; 500(7463): 415.
5.	Green AC, Williams GM, Logan V, Strutton GM. Reduced melanoma after regular sunscreen use: randomized trial follow-up. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29(3): 257–263.
6.	Dummer R, Guggenheim M, Arnold AW et al. Updated Swiss guide- lines for the treatment and follow-up of cutaneous melanoma. Swiss Med Wkly 2011; 141: w13320.
7.	Bono A, Tolomio E, Trincone S et al. Micro-melanoma detection: a clinical study on 206 consecutive cases of pigmented skin lesions with a diameter < or ¼ 3 mm. Br J Dermatol 2006; 155(3): 570–573.
8.	Grob JJ, Bonerandi JJ. The ‘ugly duckling’ sign: identification of the
common characteristics of nevi in an individual as a basis for melanoma screening. Arch Dermatol 1998; 134(1): 103–104.
9.	Kittler H, Pehamberger H, Wolff K, Binder M. Diagnostic accuracy of dermoscopy. Lancet Oncol 2002; 3(3): 159–165.
10.	Salerni G, Carrera C, Lovatto L et al. Benefits of total body photography and digital dermatoscopy (“two-step method of digital follow”) in the early diagnosis of melanoma in patients at high risk for melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 2012; 67(1): e17–e27.
 
11.	Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa RA et al. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature 2017; 542(7639): 115–118.
12.	Gershenwald JE, Scolyer RA, Hess KR et al. Melanoma staging: evidence-based changes in the American Joint Committee on Cancer eighth edition cancer staging manual. CA Cancer J Clin 2017; 67(6): 472–492.
13.	Whiteman DC, Pavan WJ, Bastian BC. The melanomas: a synthesis of epidemiological, clinical, histopathological, genetic, and biological aspects, supporting distinct subtypes, causal pathways, and cells of ori- gin. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res 2011; 24(5): 879–897.
14.	Yao Z, Yaeger R, Rodrik-Outmezguine VS et al. Tumours with class 3 BRAF mutants are sensitive to the inhibition of activated RAS. Nature 2017; 548(7666): 234–238.
15.	Hayward NK, Wilmott JS, Waddell N et al. Whole-genome landscapes of major melanoma subtypes. Nature 2017; 545(7653): 175–180.
16.	Snyder A, Makarov V, Merghoub T et al. Genetic basis for clinical re- sponse to CTLA-4 blockade in melanoma. N Engl J Med 2014; 371(23): 2189–2199.
17.	Thompson JF, Scolyer RA, Kefford RF. Cutaneous melanoma. Lancet 2005; 365(9460): 687–701.
18.	Tzellos T, Kyrgidis A, Mocellin S et al. Interventions for melanoma in situ, including lentigo maligna. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014.
19.	Clark GS, Pappas-Politis EC, Cherpelis BS et al. Surgical management of melanoma in situ on chronically sun-damaged skin. Cancer Control 2008; 15(3): 216–224.
20.	Fogarty GB, Hong A, Scolyer RA et al. Radiotherapy for lentigo mali- gna: a literature review and recommendations for treatment. Br J Dermatol 2014; 170(1): 52–58.
21.	Veronesi U, Adamus J, Bandiera DC et al. Inefficacy of immediate node dissection in stage 1 melanoma of the limbs. N Engl J Med 1977; 297(12): 627–630.
22.	Sim FH, Taylor WF, Ivins JC et al. A prospective randomized study of the efficacy of routine elective lymphadenectomy in management of malignant melanoma. Preliminary results. Cancer 1978; 41(3): 948–956.
23.	Balch CM, Soong SJ, Bartolucci AA et al. Efficacy of an elective regional lymph node dissection of 1 to 4 mm thick melanomas for patients 60 years of age and younger. Ann Surg 1996; 224: 255–263; discussion 263–256.
24.	Cascinelli N, Morabito A, Santinami M et al. Immediate or delayed dis- section of regional nodes in patients with melanoma of the trunk: a randomised trial. WHO Melanoma Programme. Lancet 1998; 351(9105): 793–796.
25.	Han D, Zager JS, Shyr Y et al. Clinicopathologic predictors of sentinel lymph node metastasis in thin melanoma. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31(35): 4387–4393.
26.	Sondak VK. Clinical problems in the immunotherapy, surgery, and ra- diation therapy of melanoma. American Society of Clinical Oncology 2017 Educational Book. American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO). 2017.
27.	Morton DL, Thompson JF, Cochran AJ et al. Final trial report of sentinel-node biopsy versus nodal observation in melanoma. N Engl J Med 2014; 370(7): 599–609.
28.	Thomas JM. Prognostic false-positivity of the sentinel node in melan- oma. Nat Clin Pract Oncol 2008; 5(1): 18–23.
29.	van Akkooi A. Sentinel node followed by completion lymph node dis- section versus nodal observation: staging or therapeutic? Controversy continues despite final results of MSLT-1. Melanoma Res 2014; 24(4): 291–294.
30.	Nieweg OE. False-negative sentinel node biopsy. Ann Surg Oncol 2009; 16(8): 2089–2091.
31.	Dummer R, Ramelyte E, Levesque M et al. Critical aspects to achieve a high-quality melanoma clinic. Curr Opin Oncol 2017; 29(2): 145–150.
32.	van Akkooi ACJ, de Wilt JHW, Verhoef C et al. Clinical relevance of melanoma micrometastases (<0.1 mm) in sentinel nodes: are
 
these nodes to be considered negative? Ann Oncol 2006; 17(10): 1578–1585.
33.	van Akkooi ACJ, de Wilt JHW, Voit C et al. Sentinel lymph-node false positivity in melanoma. Nat Clin Pract Oncol 2008; 5(4): E2.
34.	Murali R, Desilva C, Thompson JF, Scolyer RA. Factors predicting re- currence and survival in sentinel lymph node-positive melanoma patients. Ann Surg 2011; 253(6): 1155–1164.
35.	van der Ploeg APT, van Akkooi ACJ, Rutkowski P et al. Prognosis in patients with sentinel node-positive melanoma is accurately defined by the combined Rotterdam tumor load and Dewar topography criteria. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29(16): 2206–2214.
36.	van der Ploeg APT, van Akkooi ACJ, Haydu LE et al. The prognostic significance of sentinel node tumour burden in melanoma patients: an international, multicenter study of 1539 sentinel node-positive melan- oma patients. Eur J Cancer 2014; 50(1): 111–120.
37.	Leiter U, Stadler R, Mauch C et al. Complete lymph node dissection versus no dissection in patients with sentinel lymph node biopsy posi- tive melanoma (DeCOG-SLT): a multicentre, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17(6): 757–767.
38.	Faries MB, Thompson JF, Cochran AJ et al. Completion dissection or observation for sentinel-node metastasis in melanoma. N Engl J Med 2017; 376(23): 2211–2222.
39.	Madu MF, Franke V, Bruin MM et al. Immediate completion lymph node dissection in stage IIIA melanoma does not provide significant additional staging information beyond EORTC SN tumour burden cri- teria. Eur J Cancer (Oxford, England 1990) 2017; 87: 212–215.
40.	Verver D, van Klaveren D, van Akkooi ACJ et al. Risk stratification of sentinel node-positive melanoma patients defines surgical management and adjuvant therapy treatment considerations. Eur J Cancer 2018; 96: 25–33.
41.	Coit D. The enigma of regional lymph nodes in melanoma. N Engl J Med 2017; 376(23): 2280–2281.
42.	Morton DL, Wanek L, Nizze JA et al. Improved long-term survival after lymphadenectomy of melanoma metastatic to regional nodes. Analysis of prognostic factors in 1134 patients from the John Wayne Cancer Clinic. Ann Surg 1991; 214(4): 491–501.
43.	Balch C, Buzaid A, Soong S et al. Final Version of the American Joint Committee on cancer staging system for cutaneous melanoma. J Clin Oncol 2001; 19(16): 3635–3648.
44.	Andtbacka RHI, Kaufman HL, Collichio F et al. Talimogene Laherparepvec improves durable response rate in patients with advanced melanoma. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33(25): 2780–2788.
45.	Hong A, Fogarty G. Role of radiation therapy in cutaneous melanoma. Cancer J (Sudbury, Mass.) 2012; 18(2): 203–207.
46.	Henderson MA, Burmeister BH, Ainslie J et al. Adjuvant lymph-node field radiotherapy versus observation only in patients with melanoma at high risk of further lymph-node field relapse after lymphadenectomy (ANZMTG 01.02/TROG 02.01): 6-year follow-up of a phase 3, rando- mised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16(9): 1049–1060.
47.	Miura JT, Kroon HM, Beasley GM et al. Long-term oncologic outcomes after isolated limb infusion for locoregionally metastatic melanoma: an international multicenter analysis. Ann Surg Oncol 2019; 26(8): 2486–2494.
48.	Farshad A, Burg G, Panizzon R, Dummer R. A retrospective study of 150 patients with lentigo maligna and lentigo maligna melanoma and the efficacy of radiotherapy using Grenz or soft X-rays. Br J Dermatol 2002; 146(6): 1042–1046.
49.	Eggermont AMM, Suciu S, Testori A et al. Long-term results of the randomized phase III trial EORTC 18991 of adjuvant therapy with pegylated interferon alfa-2b versus observation in resected stage III mel- anoma. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30(31): 3810–3818.
50.	Kirkwood JM, Ibrahim JG, Sondak VK et al. High- and low-dose inter- feron alfa-2b in high-risk melanoma: first analysis of intergroup trial E1690/S9111/C9190. J Clin Oncol 2000; 18(12): 2444–2458.
51.	Mocellin S, Pasquali S, Rossi CR, Nitti D. Interferon alpha adjuvant therapy in patients with high-risk melanoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Natl Cancer Inst 2010; 102(7): 493–501.
 
52.	Ives NJ, Suciu S, Eggermont AMM et al. Adjuvant interferon a for the treatment of high-risk melanoma: an individual patient data meta-ana- lysis. Eur J Cancer 2017; 82: 171–183.
53.	Eggermont AMM, Chiarion-Sileni V, Grob J-J et al. Prolonged survival in stage III melanoma with ipilimumab adjuvant therapy. N Engl J Med 2016; 375(19): 1845–1855.
54.	Eggermont AMM, Chiarion-Sileni V, Grob J-J et al. Adjuvant ipilimu- mab versus placebo after complete resection of high-risk stage III mel- anoma (EORTC 18071): a randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16(5): 522–530.
55.	Weber JS, Mandala` M, Del Vecchio M et al. Adjuvant therapy with nivolumab (NIVO) versus ipilimumab (IPI) after complete resection of stage III/IV melanoma: updated results from a phase III trial (CheckMate 238). J Clin Oncol 2018; 36(Suppl 15): 9502–9502.
56.	Weber J, Mandala` M, Del Vecchio M et al. Adjuvant nivolumab versus ipilimumab in resected stage III or IV melanoma. N Engl J Med 2017; 377(19): 1824–1835.
57.	Eggermont AMM, Blank CU, Mandala` M et al. Adjuvant pembrolizu- mab versus placebo in resected stage III melanoma. N Engl J Med 2018; 378(19): 1789–1801.
58.	Wolchok JD, Chiarion-Sileni V, Gonzalez R et al. Overall survival with combined nivolumab and ipilimumab in advanced melanoma. N Engl J Med 2017; 377(14): 1345–1356.
59.	Hodi FS, Chiarion-Sileni V, Gonzalez R et al. Nivolumab plus ipilimu- mab or nivolumab alone versus ipilimumab alone in advanced melan- oma (CheckMate 067): 4-year outcomes of a multicentre, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2018; 19(11): 1480–1492.
60.	Ascierto PA, McArthur GA, Dre´no B et al. Cobimetinib combined with vemurafenib in advanced BRAF V600-mutant melanoma (coBRIM): updated efficacy results from a randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17(9): 1248–1260.
61.	Robert C, Karaszewska B, Schachter J et al. Improved overall survival in melanoma with combined dabrafenib and trametinib. N Engl J Med 2015; 372(1): 30–39.
62.	Long GV, Hauschild A, Santinami M et al. Adjuvant dabrafenib plus trametinib in stage III BRAF-mutated melanoma. N Engl J Med 2017; 377(19): 1813–1823.
63.	Hauschild A, Dummer R, Schadendorf D et al. Longer follow-up con- firms relapse-free survival benefit with adjuvant dabrafenib plus trame- tinib in patients with resected BRAF V600-mutant stage III melanoma. J Clin Oncol 2018; 36(35): 3441–3449.
64.	Latimer NR, Bell H, Abrams KR et al. Adjusting for treatment switching in the METRIC study shows further improved overall survival with tra- metinib compared with chemotherapy. Cancer Med 2016; 5(5): 806–815.
65.	Robert C, Flaherty K, Nathan P et al. Five-year outcomes from a phase 3 METRIC study in patients with BRAF V600 E/K-mutant advanced or metastatic melanoma. Eur J of Can 2019; 109: 61–69.
66.	Flaherty KT, Robert C, Hersey P et al. Improved survival with MEK in- hibition in BRAF-mutated melanoma. N Engl J Med 2012; 367(2): 107–114.
67.	Schadendorf D, Amonkar MM, Milhem M et al. Functional and symp- tom impact of trametinib versus chemotherapy in BRAF V600E advanced or metastatic melanoma: quality-of-life analyses of the METRIC study. Ann Oncol 2014; 25(3): 700–706.
68.	Dummer R, Ascierto PA, Gogas HJ et al. Encorafenib plus binimetinib versus vemurafenib or encorafenib in patients with BRAF-mutant mel- anoma (COLUMBUS): a multicentre, open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2018; 19(5): 603–615.
69.	Dummer R, Ascierto PA, Gogas HJ et al. Overall survival in patients with BRAF-mutant melanoma receiving encorafenib plus binimetinib versus vemurafenib or encorafenib (COLUMBUS): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2018; 19(10): 1315–1327.
70.	Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J et al. ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol 2017; 28(10): 2340–2366.
 
71.	Maio M, Lewis K, Demidov L et al. Adjuvant vemurafenib in resected, BRAFV600 mutation-positive melanoma (BRIM8): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2018; 19(4): 510–520.
72.	Schadendorf D, Hassel JC, Fluck M et al. LBA67 Adjuvant immunother- apy with nivolumab (NIVO) alone or in combination with ipilimumab (IPI) versus placebo in stage IV melanoma patients with no evidence of disease (NED): A randomized, double-blind phase II trial (IMMUNED). Ann Oncol 2019; 30(Suppl_5): v851–v934.
73.	Sosman JA, Moon J, Tuthill RJ et al. A phase 2 trial of complete resec- tion for stage IV melanoma: results of Southwest Oncology Group Clinical Trial S9430. Cancer 2011; 117(20): 4740–4706.
74.	Robert C, Long GV, Brady B et al. Nivolumab in previously untreated melanoma without BRAF mutation. N Engl J Med 2015; 372(4): 320–330.
75.	Robert C, Schachter J, Long GV et al. Pembrolizumab versus ipilimu- mab in advanced melanoma. N Engl J Med 2015; 372(26): 2521–2532.
76.	Long GV, Atkinson V, Lo S et al. Combination nivolumab and ipilimu- mab or nivolumab alone in melanoma brain metastases: a multicentre randomised phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 2018; 19(5): 672–681.
77.	Larkin J, Minor D, D’Angelo S et al. Overall survival in patients with advanced melanoma who received nivolumab versus investigator’s choice chemotherapy in CheckMate 037: a randomized, controlled, open-label phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 2018; 36(4): 383–390.
78.	Long GV, Stroyakovskiy D, Gogas H et al. Dabrafenib and trametinib versus dabrafenib and placebo for Val600 BRAF-mutant melanoma: a multicentre, double-blind, phase 3 randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2015; 386(9992): 444–451.
79.	Larkin J, Ascierto PA, Dreno B et al. Combined vemurafenib and cobi- metinib in BRAF-mutated melanoma. N Engl J Med 2014; 371: 1867–1876.
80.	Liszkay G, Gogas H, Mandala` M et al. Update on overall survival in COLUMBUS: a randomized phase III trial of encorafenib (ENCO) plus binimetinib (BINI) versus vemurafenib (VEM) or ENCO in patients with BRAF V600-mutant melanoma. J Clin Oncol 2019; 37(Suppl 15): 9512–9512.
81.	Ugurel  S,  Ro¨hmel  J,  Ascierto  PA  et  al.  Survival  of  patients  with advanced metastatic melanoma: the impact of novel therapies-update 2017. Eur J Cancer 2017; 83: 247–257.
82.	Dummer R, Schadendorf D, Ascierto P et al. Binimetinib versus dacar- bazine in patients with advanced NRAS mutant melanoma (NEMO): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18(4): 435–445.
83.	Guo J, Carvajal RD, Dummer R et al. Efficacy and safety of nilotinib in patients with KIT-mutated metastatic or inoperable melanoma: final results from the global, single-arm, phase II TEAM trial. Ann Oncol 2017; 28(6): 1380–1387.
84.	Balch CM, Gershenwald JE, Soong SJ et al. Final version of 2009 AJCC melanoma staging and classification. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27(36): 6199–6206.
85.	Schadendorf D, Long GV, Stroiakovski D et al. Three-year pooled ana- lysis of factors associated with clinical outcomes across dabrafenib and trametinib combination therapy phase 3 randomised trials. Eur J Cancer 2017; 82: 45–55.
86.	Weide B, Martens A, Hassel JC et al. Baseline biomarkers for outcome of melanoma patients treated with pembrolizumab. Clin Cancer Res 2016; 22(22): 5487–5496.
87.	Beaver JA, Hazarika M, Mulkey F et al. Patients with melanoma treated with an anti-PD-1 antibody beyond RECIST progression: a US Food
 
and Drug Administration pooled analysis. Lancet Oncol 2018; 19(2): 229–239.
88.	Ascierto PA, Del Vecchio M, Robert C et al. Ipilimumab 10 mg/kg ver- sus ipilimumab 3 mg/kg in patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma: a randomised, double-blind, multicentre, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18(5): 611–622.
89.	Zimmer L, Apuri S, Eroglu Z et al. Ipilimumab alone or in combination with nivolumab after progression on anti-PD-1 therapy in advanced melanoma. Eur J Cancer 2017; 75: 47–55.
90.	Valpione S, Carlino MS, Mangana J et al. Rechallenge with BRAF- directed treatment in metastatic melanoma: a multi-institutional retro- spective study. Eur J Cancer 2018; 91: 116–124.
91.	Glitza Oliva IC, Schvartsman G, Tawbi H. Advances in the systemic treatment of melanoma brain metastases. Ann Oncol 2018; 1509–1520.
92.	Davies MA, Saiag P, Robert C et al. Dabrafenib plus trametinib in patients with BRAFV600-mutant melanoma brain metastases (COMBI- MB): a multicentre, multicohort, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18(7): 863–873.
93.	Tawbi HA, Forsyth PA, Algazi A et al. Combined nivolumab and ipili- mumab in melanoma metastatic to the brain. N Engl J Med 2018; 379(8): 722–730.
94.	Tawbi H-H, Forsyth PAJ, Hodi FS et al. Efficacy and safety of the com- bination of nivolumab (NIVO) plus ipilimumab (IPI) in patients with symptomatic melanoma brain metastases (CheckMate 204). J Clin Oncol 2019; 37(Suppl 15): 9501.
95.	Gaudy-Marqueste C, Dussouil AS, Carron R et al. Survival of melanoma patients treated with targeted therapy and immunotherapy after sys- tematic upfront control of brain metastases by radiosurgery. Eur J Cancer 2017; 84: 44–54.
96.	Minniti G, Anzellini D, Reverberi C et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery combined with nivolumab or ipilimumab for patients with melanoma brain    metastases:    evaluation    of    brain    control    and    toxicity. J Immunother Cancer 2019; 7(1): 102.
97.	Haanen J, Carbonnel F, Robert C et al. Management of toxicities from immunotherapy: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2017; 28(Suppl 4): iv119–iv142.
98.	Daud A, Tsai K. Management of treatment-related adverse events with agents targeting the MAPK pathway in patients with metastatic melan- oma. Oncologist 2017; 22(7): 823–833.
99.	Titus-Ernstoff L, Perry AE, Spencer SK et al. Multiple primary melan- oma: two-year results from a population-based study. Arch Dermatol 2006; 142(4): 433–438.
100.	Turner RM, Bell KJL, Morton RL et al. Optimizing the frequency of follow-up visits for patients treated for localized primary cutaneous melanoma. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29(35): 4641–4646.
101.	Bastiaannet E, Wobbes T, Hoekstra OS et al. Prospective comparison of [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography and computed tomography in patients with melanoma with palpable lymph node metastases: diagnostic accuracy and impact on treatment. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27(28): 4774–4780.
102.	Nieweg OE, Kroon B. The conundrum of follow-up: should it be aban- doned? Surg Oncol Clin N Am 2006; 15(2): 319–330.
103.	Beyeler M, Waldispuhl S, Strobel K et al. Detection of melanoma re- lapse: first comparative analysis on imaging techniques versus S100 pro- tein. Dermatology 2006; 213(3): 187–191.
104.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33(2): 139–144.
