




 SPECIAL ARTICLE	

Metastatic colorectal cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up5
A. Cervantes1,2, R. Adam3, S. Roselló1,2, D. Arnold4, N. Normanno5, J. Taïeb6,7, J. Seligmann8, T. De Baere9,10,11,
P. Osterlund12,13, T. Yoshino14 & E. Martinelli15, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Medical Oncology, INCLIVA Biomedical Research Institute, University of Valencia, Valencia; 2CIBERONC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; 3AP-HP Hôpital Paul Brousse, Université Paris-Saclay, ER “Chronothérapie, Cancers, Transplantation”, Villejuif, France; 4Department of Oncology and Hematology, Asklepios Tumourzentrum Hamburg, AK Altona, Hamburg, Germany; 5Cell Biology and Biotherapy Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumouri, ‘Fondazione G. Pascale’dIRCCS, Naples, Italy; 6Department of Gastroenterology and GI Oncology, Georges Pompidou European Hospital, Assitance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris AP-HP Paris Centre, Paris; 7Paris Cancer Institute SIRIC CARPEM, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Université Paris-Cité, Paris, France; 8Leeds Institute of Medical Research at St James’s, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; 9Department of Interventional Radiology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif; 10University of Paris-Saclay, UFR Médecine Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre; 11Centre d’Investigation Clinique BIOTHERIS, INSERM CIC1428, Villejuif, France; 12Tampere University Hospitals and University, Tampere, Finland; 13Tema Cancer/GI-oncology, Karolinska Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Karolinska Institute, Solna, Sweden; 14Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan; 15Department of Precision Medicine, Oncology Unit, Università della Campania “L. Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy


Available online 25 October 2022




 
INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer worldwide, with 1.1 million new cases per year, and is the second leading cause of cancer death.1 CRC occurs more frequently in middle- to high-income countries with an eightfold variation in incidence across the world. This rise may be associated with known risk factors, including alcohol intake, tobacco use, obesity, sedentariness and dietary patterns (diets low in fruits, vegetables and unre- fined plant food, and high in red meat, processed foods and fat).1,2
In Europe in 2018, CRC accounted for the second highest number of cancer deaths. However, mortality has declined since 2012.2 In middle- to high-income countries this re- ﬂects screening and early detection programmes, better therapeutic approaches (systemic therapies, biomarker- guided integration of biologicals, resection of metastases and local ablative therapies), allowing more patients the opportunity of prolonged disease control, and even cure.
Approximately 15%-30% of patients present with me- tastases, and 20%-50% of patients with initially localised

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: April 2002, last up- date November 2002. This publication supersedes the previously published versiondAnn Oncol. 2014;25(suppl 3):iii1-iii9.
0923-7534/© 2022 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 
disease will develop metastases. The most common location of metastases being liver, then lung, peritoneum and distant lymph nodes.
This European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) Guideline describes improvements in diagnosis, staging and treatment of metastatic CRC (mCRC) patients, which have contributed to the current ‘state-of-the-art’ treat- ment approaches, and provides guidance for the comprehensive management of patients with mCRC.

DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
A clinical or biological suspicion of mCRC should always be confirmed by adequate radiological imaging and histology of the primary tumour or metastases before the adminis- tration of any therapy.
Tissue handling procedures should be optimised to allow biomarker testing. Fixation with 10% neutral buffered formalin (4% formaldehyde) for no less than 6 h and no more than 48 h is recommended. The primary pathologist should review all available tumour specimens and enrich samples by macro-dissection to maximise tumour cell con- tent (>20%) before DNA extraction.
Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003, describes biomarkers and mo- lecular targets for precision medicines and corresponding ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets (ESCAT) scores. Testing for mismatch repair (MMR) status and KRAS, NRAS exon 2, 3 and 4 as well as BRAF mutations is recommended in all patients at the time of mCRC
 

 
diagnosis, due to its relevance in selecting first-line therapy. This can be carried out on either the primary tumour or any metastatic site, with a suggested turnaround of   10 days. As these mutations are negative predictive factors for the use of anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), RAS testing is mandatory before this treatment is initiated.3-5 Laboratories providing RAS testing should demonstrate successful participation in a relevant external quality assessment scheme. In situations where adequate tissue is not available, exclusion of a RAS mutation status can be conducted by analysing plasma- derived cell-free DNA.6-8
BRAF V600E mutation is a strong negative prognostic factor in mCRC. BRAF mutation status should be assessed simultaneously with RAS testing for prognostication. Addi- tionally, treatment with cetuximabeencorafenib has shown better response, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) than treatment with irinotecanecetuximab in BRAF V600E-mutant mCRC in second- and third-line treat- ment.9 Non-V600E class III BRAF mutations are not associ- ated with a worse prognosis, while the role of class II mutations remains unclear.10
Deficient mismatch repair (dMMR)/microsatellite insta- bility (MSI) testing in mCRC can assist clinicians with genetic counselling, including for identification of Lynch syndrome, and should be done to select patients for immune checkpoint inhibition (ICI) as part of the initial molecular work-up.11-13
Identification of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) amplification by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or FISH is recommended in RAS wild-type (wt) patients to detect those who may benefit from HER2 blockade.14 For practical reasons, this could be done with the initial mo- lecular tests, but anti-HER2 inhibition is only recommended in second and further lines. Therefore, the HER2 amplifica- tion will only inﬂuence a treatment plan after at least first- line progression.
Testing of other biomarkers including ALK and ROS1 gene fusions, mutations of PIK3CA and HER2 activating mutations is not (yet) recommended outside clinical trials. NTRK fu- sions are extremely uncommon in mCRC with an incidence of <0.5%; however, testing is recommended when feasible. Screening for NTRK fusions can be carried out by IHC, followed by confirmation with next generation sequencing. Most NTRK-rearranged tumours are located in the right colon and are frequently MSI-high (MSI-H). NTRK testing
could be done at any time but will only inﬂuence treatment decisions after progression on at least two lines of treatment. In the rare event of an NTRK fusion detected after a comprehensive genomic analysis, including RNA, treatment with larotrectinib or entrectinib is recom- mended.15-18
As ﬂuoropyrimidines [e.g. 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) and capecitabine] are utilised in most mCRC patients, testing for dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) deficiency should be conducted before initiating these drugs; please refer to the ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) on localised colon cancer for further guidance.19 For triﬂuridinee tipiracil, DPD testing is not required.
 
Recommendations
For biomarker testing, fixation with 10% neutral buff- ered formalin (4% formaldehyde) for no less than 6 h and no more than 48 h is recommended [V, A].
The primary pathologist should review all available tumour specimens and enrich samples by macro- dissection to maximise tumour cell content (>20%) before DNA extraction [IV, A].
Testing for MMR status and KRAS, NRAS exon 2, 3 and 4 and BRAF mutations is recommended in all patients at the time of mCRC diagnosis [I, A].
RAS testing is mandatory before treatment with anti- EGFR mAbs and can be carried out on either the primary tumour or other metastatic sites [III, A].
BRAF mutation status should be assessed simulta- neously with the evaluation of RAS, for prognostic assessment [I, B] and for the option of treatment with cetuximabeencorafenib [I, A].
dMMR/MSI testing in mCRC can assist in genetic counselling for Lynch syndrome [II, B].
dMMR/MSI status is also recommended as the initial molecular work-up in metastatic disease for its predic- tive value for the use of ICIs [I, A].
Identification of HER2 amplification by IHC or FISH is recommended in RAS-wt patients to detect those who may benefit from HER2 blockade [III, B].
Testing of other biomarkers including ALK and ROS1 gene fusions, mutations of PIK3CA and HER2 activating muta- tions is not recommended outside clinical trials [IV, D]. In the rare event that an NTRK fusion is detected by IHC and/or comprehensive genomic analysis, treatment with larotrectinib or entrectinib is recommended [III, A].
Testing for DPD deficiency has to be conducted before initiating 5-FU-based chemotherapy (ChT) [III, A].


STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
After diagnosis of mCRC, apart from a complete medical history and physical examination, a complete blood count and biochemical laboratory testing should be carried out, including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and, optionally, carbohydrate antigen (CA 19-9) levels.
Staging is carried out primarily with imaging techniques, usually contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis. Valuable additions are abdominopelvic ultrasonography, preferably with specific contrast enhancers, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI is the preferred choice in case of colorectal liver me- tastases (CRLMs) amenable to local treatment (LT), to accurately define the number and location of metastases.20 The same radiological technique should be used at baseline and for response assessment after therapy. An [18F]2-ﬂuoro- 2-deoxy-D-glucoseepositron emission tomography (FDGe PET) scan can be useful, particularly in patients with increased tumour markers without evidence of metastatic disease, or to define the extent of metastatic disease on potentially resectable metastases.
 

 
At mCRC diagnosis different risk factors should be considered. Patients with a higher Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (PS) have worse prognosis, which can be due to advanced disease stage at diagnosis and/or because they are unfit for active treatment.21
Proximal colon tumours located before the splenic ﬂexure have different embryological origins and patterns of mo- lecular characteristics compared with distal tumours.22 Proximal tumours are more frequently mucinous, associ- ated with an inﬂammatory response, with dMMR/MSI-H and hypermutated, with a higher frequency of KRAS and BRAF mutations.23 In contrast, distal colon tumours more frequently have chromosomal alterations, amplification of EGFR and HER2 genes and aberrant EGFR signalling. In mCRC, patients with proximal colon tumours have a worse prognosis, independently of the applied treatments.
Resection of the primary tumour is sometimes necessary because of obstructive symptoms or bleeding; however, when asymptomatic it is not recommended in unresectable metastatic disease. Although data from retrospective studies recommend resection of the primary tumour,24-26 randomised trials specifically addressing this could not confirm survival advantage in patients with synchronous unresectable metastases.27,28

The role of multidisciplinary teams and tumour boards in the assessment of mCRC patients
Improved clinical outcomes are seen when treatment ap- proaches for individual mCRC patients are discussed within a multidisciplinary team (MDT) of experts who meet regu- larly to review mCRC cases.29 The core MDT should include representation from medical oncology, pathology, diag- nostic radiology, radiation oncology, colorectal and hep- atobiliary surgery, gastroenterology and stomatherapy (Supplementary Table S2, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003). Further expertise may be required from surgeons with peritoneal metastasis exper- tise, thoracic surgeons, interventional radiologists and nu- clear medicine specialists. If not available in a local MDT, an established referral route should exist with a specialised cancer centre (virtual MDTs) to ensure equity of access to optimal care.30
The MDT has an ongoing role throughout the mCRC patient pathway, initially to review the diagnostic work-up to define whether or not a patient has clearly resectable or unresectable metastatic disease and to consider man- agement of the primary tumour.31,32 Patients defined as initially unresectable could have a second reassessment of resectability, preferably within 2-3 months of starting therapy, as proposed by an expert consensus.33 Conversely, when disease is deemed ‘never to be resect- able’, subsequent discussions may be managed by the treating medical oncologist and patient regarding pros and cons of various approaches and sequences, based on the perceived aims.
 
Recommendations
Staging is carried out primarily with imaging techniques, such as a contrast-enhanced CT of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis [IV, A].
A liver MRI is recommended to characterise non-typical liver lesions on CT scans or when liver metastases seem resectable or potentially resectable [IV, A].
An FDGePET scan can be useful, particularly in patients with increased tumour markers without evidence of met- astatic disease, or to define the extent of metastatic dis- ease on potentially resectable metastases [IV, B].
Resection of an asymptomatic primary tumour in pa- tients with unresectable metastatic disease cannot be recommended as standard of care [I, D].

MANAGEMENT OF RESECTABLE/POTENTIALLY RESECTABLE DISEASE
Treatment of potentially resectable mCRC
Surgical resection of R0-resectable (resectable, leaving no tumour at the margin) CRLMs is a potentially curative treatment, with reported 5-year survival rates of 20%-45%. The criteria for R0-resectability of CRLMs depend on tech- nical and oncological (prognostic) criteria and on the experience of the MDT.
Technically, resectability is not limited by number, size or bilobar metastatic involvement, if tumours may be resected leaving sufficient remnant organ (e.g. 30% remnant liver). Other ablative techniques, such as thermal ablation (TA) or stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT), may be added to surgery to achieve a complete treatment or provide an alternative to resection if inoperable due to frailty or poor anatomical location for resection.
‘Oncological’ criteria concern prognostic factors that impact disease-free survival (DFS) or the likelihood of cure. Characteristics including onset of metastatic disease (syn- chronous versus metachronous), clinical aggressiveness of the tumour as well as concomitant extrahepatic disease could lead to the recommendation of a neoadjuvant strat- egy instead of upfront surgery to get ‘the proof of time’ for a well-controlled disease and are seen as relevant factors. Indeed, up to 55%-80% of patients will experience relapse following metastatic resection, the majority occurring in the resected organ. Biological determinants including RAS, BRAF or dMMR/MSI mutational status may also inﬂuence treat- ment strategy. Despite the recognised poor prognosis in some cohorts, patients with BRAF-mutant mCRC who un- derwent R0 resection of all metastatic lesions had compa- rable outcomes to their BRAF-wt counterparts. Despite limited evidence, the exclusion of these patients from a potentially curative approach does not seem justified.
With very favourable prognostic criteria and a good technical resectability, perioperative systemic treatment may not be needed. Conversely, unfavourable criteria mandate the use of ‘best systemic treatment’ options. In patients with an unclear prognostic situation, systemic
 

 
treatment should be initiated to gain more prognostic in- sights by observation. The use of perioperative leucovorin (LV)e5-FUeoxaliplatin (FOLFOX) ChT, 3 months pre- and post-operatively in patients with technically ‘easy-to-resect’ resectable CRLMs but with negative prognostic factors, has been positively proven and can be considered as a standard of care in this circumstance (EORTC 40983 trial).34,35
Most patients have metastatic disease that is not initially suitable for potentially curative resection. It is, however, important to select patients with resectable metastases and those with initially unresectable disease in whom resection may be possible after a major response with systemic therapy. The aim of treatment here should be to convert initially unresectable disease to resectable. Median survival rates after resection are two- to threefold higher than in patients treated with systemic therapy alone, with a po- tential of cure.32
Resection of lung metastases offers 25%-35% 5-year survival rates in carefully selected patients. Resection of lung metastases in conjunction with resection of CRLMs has also shown survival benefit.34,36
In selected patients with limited peritoneal metastasis, complete cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intra- peritoneal ChT (HIPEC) may provide prolonged survival when carried out in experienced high-volume centres (in view of the relatively high morbidity associated with the procedure).37-39 This observation, however, has not been confirmed in randomised, phase III trials and therefore cannot be recommended as standard of care. A recent phase III trial (PRODIGE 7) has failed to show the added value of an oxaliplatin-based HIPEC on cytoreductive sur- gery. Indeed, the PRODIGE 7 trial reported the absence of an OS benefit after adding HIPEC to cytoreductive surgery and more frequent post-operative late complications with this combination, in patients with colorectal peritoneal metastases.40 There are ongoing trials to see if other HIPEC regimens (using mitomycin and different HIPEC procedures) may possibly lead to better outcomes.
Ovariectomy, lymphadenectomy and resection of selected other single metastases have also shown survival benefit in patient series.32
Primarily technically R0-resectable CRLMs. In patients with ‘favourable’ oncological criteria (e.g. metachronous lesions, fewer metastases, unilobar disease, no extrahepatic dis- ease), upfront resection should be done. The only phase III trial (dedicated to CRLMs) conducted in this situation showed a benefit in DFS but a non-significant improvement in OS if perioperative treatment with FOLFOX is administered.34,41
In patients with ‘unfavourable’ oncological criteria (syn- chronous lesions, more than three metastases, bilobar dis- ease, limited extrahepatic disease) and ‘favourable surgical’ criteria (e.g. no vascular infiltration), perioperative ChT, preferably with any ﬂuoropyrimidine and oxaliplatin, should be proposed.
Attention should be paid to the presence of small me- tastases (10-15 mm), which may disappear while on
 
systemic therapy, with the risk of being missed during sur- gery while still active in terms of presence of tumour cells. In this situation, neoadjuvant ChT should not exceed 2 months if indicated; upfront surgery or other interventional approaches such as a percutaneous destruction should also be discussed with the MDT. For patients in whom the me- tastases have disappeared on standard imaging, micro- scopic disease is often still present and an MDT discussion of the optimal strategy is required.
Post-operative ChT can be delivered, but the randomised evidence to support this is scarce and therefore it cannot be considered as standard of care. Fluoropyrimidineeoxali- platin-based ChT for 6 months after resection of metastases may improve outcomes unless patients failed a prior adju- vant treatment (oxaliplatin-based) for stage II or III disease within 12 months. Targeted agents are not recommended during perioperative therapy in patients with upfront resectable metastases.35,42 Perioperative or post-operative adjuvant treatment strategy decisions may be inﬂuenced by ‘biology of the disease’, the timing of onset of metastases (synchronous versus metachronous), technical criteria for resectability (or ablation) and/or the number and size of metastases.
For patients   who   relapse   within   6   months   after
oxaliplatin-based adjuvant therapy (potentially resistant to this treatment and often with a persistent sensitive neu- ropathy), an MDT discussion of the optimal individual strategy is required. If a preoperative strategy is chosen, treatment selection should reﬂect this situation and the ‘best available systemic treatment’ should be used.
Potentially resectable metastatic disease, conversion therapy. The addition of a targeted agent to a cytotoxic doublet or triplet is the most effective treatment in mCRC. For efficacy assessment, overall response rate (ORR) seems to be the best parameter in direct and cross-trial comparisons.
Anti-EGFR mAbs in RAS-wt patients with left-sided pri- mary tumours are more effective than bevacizumab-based combinations.43,44
According to cross-trial comparisons, LVe5-FUeoxalipla- tineirinotecan (FOLFOXIRI) with and without bevacizumab also resulted in high ORRs.45-47
In patients with RAS-mutant disease, a cytotoxic triplete bevacizumab and, to a lesser extent, a cytotoxic doublete bevacizumab are considered the best choice in patients who may tolerate this intensive approach.
Resection of the metastases should be carried out 3-4 weeks from the previous administration of ChT alone or ChTeanti-EGFR mAbs, or at least 5 weeks after ChTe bevacizumab (if bevacizumab has not been omitted from the last cycle). It should be carried out as soon as the metastases, as a result of size reduction, are technically resectable, since unnecessarily prolonged administration of ChT may lead to increased liver toxicity and thus, higher post-operative morbidity.36
Surgery following systemic treatment could be more challenging than for initially  resectable patients. Specific
 

 
techniques, such as portal embolisation, resection combined with radiofrequency ablation (RFA)/microwave ablation (MWA) or two-stage hepatectomy, may be applied further. Also, patients unresponsive to first-line ChT should not be denied liver resection since the outcome of resected patients after second-line ChT could also be favourable. This approach needs frequent assessment of response to indicate surgery at the right moment. Intra-arterial ChT could be an option in such patients, to both recover a response and to achieve liver resection.48,49 The management of these patients requires a particular dedication and expertise within the team.50,51
After surgery, re-uptake of the previous systemic treat- mentdwith the same regimendcan be considered, spe- cifically if pathological response has occurred, but there is no evidence from randomised studies to support this approach. Generally, the total treatment duration should not exceed 6 months. New approaches, such as intra- arterial post-operative adjuvant treatments, are currently under investigation in randomised studies.52

LTs in management of patients with oligometastatic disease
Management of oligometastatic disease. The definition of oligometastatic disease (OMD) is important as treatment strategies should be based on the possibility of achieving eradication of all metastases and/or a ‘no evidence of dis- ease’ (NED) status, either initially or after systemic therapy.
Generally, a traditional clinical definition of OMD is: One to five metastatic lesions, occasionally more if com- plete eradication is possible
●	Up to two metastatic sites
●	Controlled primary tumour (optionally resected)
●	All metastatic sites must be safely treatable by LT
OMD status has therefore been established by radiolog- ical appearances and clinical judgment. Currently, biological factors do not contribute to this definition, but this may change considering, for example, molecular subtypes with specific prognostic background and/or treatment implica- tions. Notably, OMD status can occur in multiple clinical scenarios in the continuum of care, e.g. during different treatment lines. Therefore, careful and continuous reas- sessment is recommended.
Consideration should be given to relevant factors in the OMD setting:
Disease-related factors, e.g. size, number and localisation of metastatic sites, status of primary tumour, previous treatment-free intervals, previous treatments and their respective outcome, overall prognosis
Surgery and other LT-related factors, e.g. technical ability to treat and/or to achieve a locally complete eradication. This must be discussed versus potential toxicity and the invasiveness of the technique and the alternatives (mostly, continuation or initiation of systemic treatment) Patient-related factors, e.g. PS, frailty and comorbidity, fitness for systemic treatment and LT, individual treat- ment goals and preferences
 
Assessment for LT of OMD must include an optimal im- aging strategy before LT: generally, a contrast-enhanced CT scan, with MRI, ultrasound, PET and others. Specialist MDT input and thorough patient assessment and counselling are warranted.
The selection of the best LT for OMD differs according to: The size, number and localisation of the metastases The expected likelihood of complete eradication
The invasiveness of the chosen technique
The local expertise with regard to the use of a particular LT method
Consideration of patient frailty, life expectancy and preferences

The integration of LT into the therapeutic continuum of care can be:
As a definitive eradication in limited disease. Usually, sur- gery will be used for this goal, but a nonsurgical LT only if tumour characteristics (e.g. localisation) and/or patient factors would limit the surgical approach.
As a replacement for surgery; mostly in prognostically unclear situations or after response to systemic treat- ment in more widespread disease.
As a primary or metastasis-specific treatment to halt further dissemination. This could delay (or even elimi- nate) the need for systemic treatment. This can be used as an initial treatment for slowly progressing tumours.
As a consolidative treatment, following systemic therapy to delay or pause further treatment.

OMD should be considered a specific situation in mCRC treatment. OMD management will, generally, in most cases start with induction ChT treatment, with response (or at least disease stabilisation) being a strong predictor for a favourable prognosis, justifying the enhanced local control by LT. However, in favourable prognostic situations with limited metastatic spread, upfront LT (without preceding systemic therapy) is a standard of care. LT is an option in oligo-progressive disease (i.e. very limited recurrence/non- response in a patient receiving systemic treatment). Such OMD could be construed as a result of intra-tumour het- erogeneity. The aim of LT here is to eliminate the cell clones no longer responding to treatment and to enable the continuation of the systemic therapy.

Intent of treatment and choice of LT
Curative treatment approaches. A complete eradication of tumour can be obtained using surgical R0 resection and/ or A0 ablation (evidence of ablation margins and NED at follow-up imaging). For patients with OMD confined to a single organ (most frequently liver or lung), or a few organs or sites (pre-dominantly visceral metastases, e.g. liver and lung), a potentially curative approach exists. In this setting, long-term survival or even cure can be attained in 20%-45% of patients who undergo complete R0 resection or com- plete A0 TA of their metastases.53-55
 

 
In the absence of randomised trials comparing surgical with nonsurgical disease management, surgery has remained the standard treatment approach for patients with resectable OMD. However, TA and radiotherapy ach- ieve high rates of complete tumour eradication of small metastases and can be seen as alternatives if a widely invasive surgical approach is required.55-58
Patients with liver and lung metastases have a better prognosis than those with other metastatic disease loca- tions. For example, as limited lung metastases are associ- ated with slower growth and prolonged survival, a ‘watch and wait’ strategy with regular surveillance imaging may also be appropriate.59,60 The data showing different out- comes depending on the site(s) of OMD are likely to reﬂect molecular differences. Selection of the best ‘situation- adapted’ treatment strategy should consider all of these factors as part of an MDT treatment decision before the start of systemic treatment and at the time of best response.
Use of LT with non-curative intent. For patients with more extensive disease, the value of an LT may contribute to long-term survival or a prolonged PFS, but is rarely curative.61 Here, LT is part of a multimodal therapy approach to provide well-controlled sites of metastases with optional discontinuation of systemic therapy, with the goal of long-term disease control and potentially improved OS. For example, the reported median ChT-free survival after TA of lung metastases from CRC was 12.2 months in the overall population and 20.9 months in lung-only me- tastases patients.62
Modalities for LT in OMD. Modalities for LT are summar- ised in Figure 1. Management of OMD is outlined in Supplementary Figure S1, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003.
 
Surgery. Treatment should aim to achieve complete resection of all tumour masses, using surgical resection and/or nonsurgical interventions.
For patients with resectable OMD confined to a single organ (most frequently liver or lung) and/or a few organs (and even localised peritoneal spread), surgery remains the standard and best (potentially) curative treatment approach. Operative resection of metastases must be seen in the context of prognostic information and technical limitations.
Local ablation techniques. Thermal ablation. TA such as RFA has a limitation inherent to size range of maximum 2-3 cm.63 Safety margin of ablation is a strong predictor of complete eradication.55,64 In the randomised phase II CLOCC trial (ChT plus RFA surgical resection versus ChT alone, for patients with a median of four CRLMs), an improvement in PFS and in OS was reported.65
Data on the use of TA in combination with liver resection in an effort to obtain NED demonstrate improved periop- erative outcomes without compromising long-term survival compared with bilateral resection.36,66 Data on TAs other than RFA are limited, but outcome appears similar between RFA and MWA, with ablative margins predictive for com- plete eradication of the targeted disease with both tech- nologies, and a possible better control of perivascular tumours with MWA.55
A meta-analysis supports surgery to provide better local control and longer OS for CRLMs.67 Reported differences were due to limitations of TA technologies, operator experience and insufficient safety margins applied, or sub- ject to possible patient selection bias. TA applied to patients who previously benefitted from surgery improves liver- specific PFS,65 leading to the utilisation of RFA as a valid treatment option for recurrent disease after surgical
 


 
Figure 1. Local treatment of CRC metastases. Purple: general categories or stratification; red: surgery; dark green: radiotherapy; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white: other aspects of management.
CRC, colorectal cancer; CRLM, colorectal liver metastasis; HAIC, hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy; mCRC, metastatic colorectal cancer; OMD, oligometastatic disease; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; SIRT, selective internal radiotherapy; TA, thermal ablation; TACE, transarterial chemoembolisation; TARE, transarterial radioembolisation.
aIn patients with unresectable CRLMs only, or OMD in the liver, TA can be considered for small metastases [III, B]. In patients with lung-only metastases or OMD including lung
lesions, TA may be considered along with resection, according to tumour size, number, location, the extent of lung parenchyma loss, comorbidity or other factors [III, B].
 

 
resection in small CRLMs.68-71 Randomised clinical trials are ongoing to accurately assess surgery versus TA in CRLMs (COLLISION study).
TA techniques also have proven efficacy in the ablation of lung metastases: local control rates of 88%-94% at 1 year and 77%-90% at 3 years have been reported.54,56,72,73 Similarly, margins and volume of ablation are more predictive of complete tumour eradication than type of TA used.74 Mor- tality and major complication rates may be as low as 1%.75 A systematic review concluded that a firm conclusion could not be drawn with regard to the use of surgery or RFA.76
SBRT. High conformal hypo-fractionated SBRT of metas- tases has been reported with a large range of local control rates of 31%-90% after 2 years, including 80% for liver and lung metastases, but also for lymph nodes.57,58 The risk of failure correlates with tumour size as well as biologically effective dose and motion management both for lung and CRLMs.77-79 Across several series, no grade 3 events were recorded. SBRT is considered an effective and safe ablative treatment, but with no large prospective study available. Therefore, with the benefit of short treatment time, lack of a need for recovery and favourable overall toxicity profile, SBRT is a treatment option, although it is yet unclear which patients benefit most. The OLIVER trial (NCT03296839) aims to evaluate the impact of SBRT versus ChT alone, while another randomised trial aims to compare MWA and SBRT for inoperable CRLMs (NCT02820194).
Intra-arterial therapies. Transarterial chemo- embolisation. The data on transarterial chemoembolisation (TACE) for CRLMs are mostly related to the use of irinotecan-based drug-eluting microspheres (DEBIRI), including two randomised studies. Despite significant limi- tations in design and analysis of both, DEBIRI compared with LVe5-FUeirinotecan (FOLFIRI) resulted in statistically significant improved OS and PFS,80 whereas FOLFOXebev- acizumabeDEBIRI (FOLFOXeDEBIRI) reported improved response rate (RR), downsizing to resection and PFS compared with FOLFOXebevacizumab.81 In the neo- adjuvant setting, DEBIRI is reported as safe and feasible, yielding pathological major or complete response in >77% of targeted lesions.82 A review of DEBIRI data, including 850
patients reported ORR of 56.2% and median PFS and OS of
8.1 and 16.8 months, respectively.83 In the chemo- refractory setting, a new microspheres/irinotecan formula- tion demonstrated an ORR of 83% and median OS (mOS) of 14 months.84
Transarterial radioembolisation/selective internal radia- tion therapy. Transarterial radioembolisation (TARE)/ selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) typically involves a single delivery of a radionuclide [yttrium (Y)-90, or hol- mium-166],85,86 connected to either resin or glass particles, or bio-resorbable poly (L-lactic acid) microspheres as a de- livery platform into the hepatic artery with the therapeutic effect essentially limited to irradiation.
For patients with liver-limited metastases failing the available chemotherapeutic options, TARE with Y-90 resin
 
microspheres has prolonged time to tumour progression and time to liver progression, in a small, randomised study.87
However, aggregated data of >1000 patients treated within three randomised studies failed to show a benefit in
OS,88 when TARE was added to the first cycle of an investigator-determined ‘best systemic treatment’. A rando- mised phase III study of TARE with resin microspheres failed to show an overall PFS (as primary endpoint) benefit, whilst a significantly better ‘liver-specific-PFS’ was documented.89 In this trial, 45% of patients had the primary tumour in place and 40% had extrahepatic disease, suggesting that TARE may be most beneficial in patients with liver-limited or liver- predominant disease. Another potential subgroup with a distinct benefit is patients with right-sided primary tumour.88,90
A recent further phase III trial compared second-line ChT alone with second-line ChT plus transarterial Y-90 glass microspheres in 428 patients with liver-dominant or liver- only disease (EPOCH trial). A significant improvement in PFS (as primary endpoint) was documented and ORRs were 21.1% and 34.0% for ChT alone and ChT plus TARE, respectively. A subgroup analysis suggested PFS benefit may be more dominant in patients with fewer than three le- sions, resected primary tumour, lower tumour burden, left primary tumour location (PTL) and a KRAS mutation.
Hepatic arterial infusion ChT. Hepatic arterial infusion ChT (HAIC) is carried out through intra-arterial ports or pumps placed surgically or percutaneously.91 The most commonly used drugs are ﬂoxuridine (FUDR) and oxaliplatin, infused through ports. The European experience is mostly linked with intra-arterial oxaliplatin over 2 h and systemic 5-FUeLV delivered over 48 h. HAIC with oxaliplatin demonstrated 62% ORR in heavily pre-treated patients with more than ninefold higher complete pathological response than systemic therapy.92,93 The phase II OPTILIV study with HAIC with irinotecaneoxaliplatine5-FU combined with intravenous (i.v.) cetuximab met its primary endpoint of conversion to R0-R1 (microscopic tumour at the margin) hepatectomy in 29.7% of 64 RAS-wt pre-treated patients bearing a median of 10 CRLMs involving six segments of the liver.49

Recommendations
Treatment of potentially resectable mCRC
In patients with resectable metastases and with favour- able prognostic criteria and a good surgical approach, perioperative systemic treatment may not be needed [III, B].
In patients with resectable metastases, the use of peri- operative oxaliplatin-based ChT is recommended where the prognostic situation is unclear [II, B].
Anti-EGFR mAbs in left-sided RAS-wt patients should be used as conversion therapy, when complete resection is the aim [II, A].
In patients with right-sided and RAS-mutant disease, FOLFOXIRIebevacizumab and, to a lesser extent, a
 

 
cytotoxic doubletebevacizumab should be considered the best choice depending on patients’ ability to tolerate triplet ChT [II, A].
Patients unresponsive to first-line ChT should not be de- nied resection or ablation of metastases since the outcome of resected patients after second-line treat- ment could be also favourable. Intra-arterial ChT could be an option in such patients, not only to recover a response but also to achieve liver resection [III, C].
In case of a peritoneal metastasis only, complete cytore- ductive surgery should be carried out [II, A]. The addition of HIPEC can be considered as an experimental procedure, still to be validated in clinical trials. Therefore, its use cannot be recommended outside of this setting [II, D].
Intent and choice of local treatment
Treatment approaches for all patients with mCRC should be discussed within an MDT of experts (especially in LT) who meet regularly to review OMD cases [V, A].
LT can be used as a primary or metastasis-specific treat- ment to halt further dissemination, and/or following sys- temic therapy as a consolidation treatment, to delay or pause further treatment [III, C].
Frequent radiological re-evaluations of the potential applicability of surgery or other LT techniques should be carried out, generally every 8-12 weeks [IV, A].
Local ablation treatment
In patients with unresectable CRLMs only, or OMD in the liver, TA can be considered for small metastases [III, B].
TA is a valid treatment option for recurrent disease after surgical resection for small CRLMs [II, B].
In patients with lung-only metastases or OMD including lung lesions, TA may be considered along with resection, according to tumour size, number, location, the extent of lung parenchyma loss, comorbidity or other factors [III, B].
SBRT is a treatment option, although it is yet unclear which patients benefit most [III, B].
Intra-arterial therapies
TACE, TARE/SIRT and HAIC may be also considered as treatment options with non-curative intent [III, B].
SIRT, HAIC and chemoembolisation of CRLMs in earlier treatment lines may be interesting as ‘consolidation treatment’ but should be limited to clinical trials [V, D].

MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED AND METASTATIC DISEASE WITHOUT POTENTIAL CONVERSION
An MDT discussion would be advisable to decide the best treatment approach for each individual patient, taking into consideration several factors that were established in the 2016 ESMO Consensus guideline (see Supplementary Table S3, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc. 2022.10.003), such as clinical presentation (impending symptoms at diagnosis, PTL), histology and molecular biology of the tumour, the patient characteristics (age, PS, comorbidities, socioeconomic factors), the goal of
 
treatment and treatment-related issues [toxicity, quality of life (QoL), etc.].94 When considering the best treatment option for patients with mCRC, all of the above-mentioned factors and medical history must be taken into consideration.
Frail patients will not tolerate combination therapies with potential side-effects. In these patients, the main treatment goal is maintaining QoL and improving symptoms. These patients could instead receive lower toxicity therapies, such as ﬂuoropyrimidine as monotherapy or combined with bevacizumab, or anti-EGFR mAbs in left-sided RAS-wt tu- mours. The 2016 ESMO consensus guideline established that the initial consideration for treatment stratification was whether patients were ‘fit’ or ‘unfit’.94
Age alone is not a contraindication of combined therapy, for a patient with good fitness, organ function and without significant comorbidities. A complete geriatric assessment to consider all the factors that can affect treatment toler- ance and compliance is advisable.95,96
Tumour characteristics are critical, for both prognosis and predicted response to the available treatments. The tumour burden, location of the metastases (involving one or more organs) and the primary tumour, or impending symptoms related to the primary tumour (haemorrhage or intestinal obstruction), will guide the treatment strategy.
The PTL and mutational status of the tumour is key to decide the best treatment approach, as described above. The location of the primary tumour proximal to the splenic ﬂexure also has prognostic implications, with a shorter survival related both to the nature of the tumour, meta- static sites, and to a poor response to treatment with ChT and mAbs. It must be stressed that those right colon tu- mours, in general, benefit less in terms of PFS and OS from treatment with anti-EGFR mAbs, compared with tumours located distal to the splenic ﬂexure.22 Nevertheless, RRs are similar for both tumour locations.
The historical ESMO classification of patients in four groups according to the treatment goals has evolved (see Supplementary Table S4, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003).97 Treatment goals for fit pa- tients differ according to different scenarios (see Supplementary Table S5, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003): (i) cure, generally achieved through surgery, in those cases of OMD localised to liver, lung and other solitary organs, (ii) to achieve a good response and downstaging with ChT, allowing treatment with curative intent in initially unresectable disease and (iii) improving tumour-related symptoms, delaying progression and prolonging survival in metastatic disease not amenable to definitive surgical treatment or LTs despite response and all while maintaining QoL. In the third group of patients, the continuum of care concept demonstrates that sequencing of all the different treatment options results in prolonged disease control and improved survival.98 Liver trans- plantation is emerging as an experimental option for pa- tients with CRLMs but results of randomised studies are still pending.
 

 
First-line treatment
Proposed first-line treatment strategies are shown in Figure 2.
Cytotoxic agents. 5-FU is the backbone of mCRC treatment. Most first- and second-line clinical trials have explored different combinations based on ﬂuoropyrimidines, both i.v. 5-FU (as bolus or as continuous infusion, with a different toxicity profile) or oral capecitabine; these are considered equivalent.99,100 S-1 (tegafuregimeracileoteracil) is an alternative ﬂuoropyrimidine when i.v. 5-FU or capecitabine- based ChT cannot be used due to cardiotoxicity and/or hand-foot syndrome.101
The addition of oxaliplatin and/or irinotecan to a ﬂuo- ropyrimidine improves RR and survival.102,103 Both dou- blets, FOLFOX and FOLFIRI, are considered to be equally
 
effective and the selection in the first-line can be guided by their different toxicity profiles and the biological added to enhance efficacy. Capecitabine is more frequently combined with oxaliplatin (CAPOX) and less frequently with irinotecan (CAPIRI) because CAPIRI has a more toxic profile than FOLFIRI.104 A dose-modified CAPIRI schedule showed a more favourable toxicity profile.105 The triplet FOLFOXIRI has improved RRs and survival compared with FOLFIRI, but side-effects limit its applicability to selected fit patients without significant comorbidities.45
Several trials have explored delivering treatment with ﬂuoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin and irinotecan either sequentially or in combination in first or later lines of treatment, showing that both   strategies   achieved similar OS.106-108 This observation confirmed that first- line treatment with a ﬂuoropyrimidine, as a single
 


 
Figure 2. Management of stage IV unresectable mCRC in ﬁrst-line therapy. Purple: general categories or stratification; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white: other aspects of management.
5-FU, 5-ﬂuorouracil; ChT, chemotherapy; dMMR, deficient mismatch repair; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; FOLFIRI, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracileirinotecan; FOLFOX, leucovorine5-ﬂuo- rouracileoxaliplatin; FOLFOXIRI, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracileoxaliplatineirinotecan; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale; mCRC, metastatic colorectal cancer; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; mut, mutant; PD, progressive disease; PS, performance status; S-1, tegafuregimeracileoteracil; wt, wild-type.
aIn patients presenting with cardiotoxicity and/or hand-foot syndrome on 5-FU or capecitabine-based ChT, S-1 may be used as an alternative [III, B].
bAdditional details on treatments and drug combinations can be found under the section ‘Management of advanced and metastatic disease without potential con- version’ (subsections ‘First-line treatment’ and ‘Second-line treatment’).
cIn frail or elderly patients unable to tolerate ChT whose tumours are left-sided and RAS-wt.
dFOLFIRIecetuximab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; FOLFOX4epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; mFOLFOX6epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3.i eFOLFOX4epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; modified FOLFOX6epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; for FOLFIRIecetuximab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4.i fIn a very selected population.
gCAPOXe or FOLFOX4ebevacizumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1.i
hA triplet with FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab is an option for selected patients with good PS and without comorbidities [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2].i
iESMO-MCBS v1.1165 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
jESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been defined by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.164 See Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003, for more information on ESCAT scores.
 

 
agent, is a reasonable option, particularly in frail patients.
Biological targeted agents. Several targeted agents against EGFR (cetuximab and panitumumab) or against the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway (bevacizumab and ramucirumab, or the protein aﬂibercept) have demonstrated improved outcomes when combined with ChT, or as a monotherapy in the case of anti-EGFR mAbs.
Anti-EGFR. Two different anti-EGFR mAbs have demon- strated activity in mCRC as monotherapy or combined with ChT. Cetuximab is a chimeric anti-EGFR mAb, which has demonstrated effectiveness in different lines of treatment, as has panitumumab, a humanised anti-EGFR mAb.109,110 Both treatments can produce characteristic skin toxicity, which must be properly managed with antibiotics and topical corticosteroids.111
The presence of RAS mutations is associated with resis- tance to anti-EGFR mAbs and knowing the expanded RAS mutational status is mandatory for use of both cetuximab and panitumumab, avoiding anti-EGFR mAb treatment when a RAS mutation is confirmed.112,113
In the first-line setting, FOLFIRIecetuximab was studied in a
non-selected population of mCRC patients.114 A retrospective analysis demonstrated that only those patients without KRAS exon 2 mutations had a significantly reduced risk of disease progression, improved OS and increased RR, compared with those who received FOLFIRI alone, and a RAS expanded anal- ysis confirmed the benefit in RR and survival.115
A combination of FOLFOX with or without panitumumab was similarly studied in an initially non-selected population of mCRC, although analysis of the mutational status was completed in >90% of the patients. In the KRAS-wt population, a statistically significant improvement in PFS and OS was observed with FOLFOX4epanitumumab.116 An expanded RAS analysis, including mutations in KRAS exons 2, 3 and 4, NRAS exons 2, 3 and 4 and BRAF V600E, also confirmed the efficacy of FOLFOXepanitumumab in the RAS-wt population.112
Cetuximabeoxaliplatin in the first-line setting was also explored, showing a better RR and a trend toward an improvement in PFS and OS in the RAS-wt population in a randomised phase II study and better ORR, PFS and OS in a Chinese phase III study.113,117
When a CAPOX combination was explored in addition to cetuximab in the COIN trial, no significant benefit in terms of PFS or OS was observed, with the exception of an increased RR in the RAS-wt population treated with cetux- imab.118 Moreover, the addition of cetuximab to capecitabine-based therapy resulted in more diarrhoea and skin toxicity, leading to a dose reduction/discontinuation of the ChT schedule and a reduced exposure to ﬂuoropyr- imidines. Combination with anti-EGFR mAbecapecitabine- based ChT is not recommended. FLOX (LVebolus 5-FUe oxaliplatin)ecetuximab also failed to show any benefit. Therefore, anti-EGFRebolus 5-FU-based ChT is not recommended.119
 
Tumour location is an important factor when deciding the use of anti-EGFR mAbs in RAS-wt tumours. As mentioned previously, the benefit of anti-EGFR mAbs is very relevant in left-sided tumours, with a significant increase in RR and relevant prolongation of PFS and OS.22 In right-sided tumours no benefit is observed for PFS and OS by the addition of cetuximab or panitumumab, except an increase in RRs. For this reason, a doublet or a triplet with bevacizumab is the preferred option for patients with right-sided tumours independently of the RAS mutational status. Only in right-sided RAS-wt tumours, in which a good response is needed, i.e. for conversion therapy, a doublet with an anti-EGFR mAb can be selected. In frail or elderly patients, unable to tolerate ChT, whose tumours are left-sided and RAS-wt, monotherapy with anti-EGFR mAbs may be an option.120 Combination of anti-EGFR mAb with ChT cannot be recommended in BRAF-mutant tumours.
Anti-VEGF. In the first-line setting of mCRC, the only anti- angiogenic that has shown better outcomes in combination with ChT is bevacizumab, a selective VEGF-A inhibitor. This antiangiogenic has characteristic class-related side-effects including increase in blood pressure and proteinuria and, less frequently, arterial thrombosis, and an increased risk of bleeding, intestinal perforation and wound healing delay, which can be decreased with proper patient selection. There are currently no biomarkers to identify which patients may benefit more from this treatment.
The addition of bevacizumab to capecitabine increased PFS compared with capecitabine monotherapy and this benefit on PFS was confirmed in patients 70 years old in the AVEX phase III trial.121,122 No significant differences in OS were observed.
The addition of bevacizumab to an irinotecanebolus 5- FUeLV (IFL) showed an improvement in OS, PFS and RR, compared with IFLeplacebo.123 In the NO16966 phase III trial, a 2 2 factorial design compared any ﬂuoropyrimidinee oxaliplatin combination (CAPOX or FOLFOX4) with or without bevacizumab or placebo, showing an improvement in outcome, limited to PFS.124
The TRICOLORE phase III trial compared mFOLFOX6 or CAPOX and bevacizumab with irinotecaneS-1 (IRIS)ebev- acizumab,125 concluding that IRISebevacizumab is non- inferior to mFOLFOX6e or CAPOXebevacizumab with respect to PFS, with comparable OS.126
Anti-EGFR or anti-VEGF strategy in RAS-wt mCRC patients. To address which targeted therapy would offer the greatest benefit when combined with ChT in the first-line setting, the FIRE-3 trial compared FOLFIRIebevacizumab with FOLFIRIecetuximab, in KRAS (exon 2)-wt mCRC. No differ- ences in the primary endpoint of ORR or in PFS were observed. However, an OS improvement was observed with cetuximab. A post hoc analysis showed a significant pro- portion of patients achieved a better objective response, early tumour shrinkage and median depth of response in the extended RAS-wt population receiving FOLFIRIe cetuximab.43
 

 
A combined analysis of the FIRE-3 and CRYSTAL trials confirmed the benefit in OS on left-sided tumours treated with FOLFIRIecetuximab.127
The CALGB/SWOG 80405 trial also compared cetuximab with bevacizumab, in combination with an investigator’s choice ChT doublet (FOLFOX or FOLFIRI), in KRAS (exon 2)- wt mCRC. No differences in the primary endpoint of OS were observed between the study arms, suggesting that both treatment strategies were equally effective in the first- line setting on KRAS-wt mCRC. The expanded RAS analyses showed no differences in OS or PFS but an increased RR with cetuximab.44
A subsequent exploratory retrospective analysis of CALGB/SWOG 80405 trial examined the impact of PTL. Pa- tients with left-sided KRAS-wt tumours treated with cetux- imab had an increased OS and PFS; conversely, patients with right-sided tumours treated with bevacizumab had an increased OS, confirming the limited benefit of anti-EGFR therapies on right-sided tumours.128
An exploratory phase II trial compared mFOLFOX6 with panitumumab versus bevacizumab in patients with KRAS exon 2-wt mCRC.129 The final results confirmed a benefit in PFS in the extended RAS-wt population treated with FOLFOXepanitumumab, with no significant differences in OS.129 A phase III randomised trial (PARADIGM) comparing both options resulted in a significant benefit in OS for the FOLFOXepanitumumab arm in left-sided tumours, as well as the whole population. The mOS was >36 months, confirming the benefit of this therapy in the first-line setting, although most of the benefit is driven by left-sided tumours.130
Combining anti-VEGF plus anti-EGFR mAbs is not superior to ChTeanti-VEGF alone in terms of PFS, OS and RR. Furthermore, it increases grade 3 and 4 adverse event rates, and is therefore not recommended.131
Triplets. The strategy of combining the three active ChT agents 5-FU, oxaliplatin and irinotecan (FOLFOXIRI) has been explored in mCRC, with the main purpose of improving tumour shrinkage (shown by RR), thus allowing a complete resection of metastases, but increasing potential toxicities.107,132 A phase III trial showed increased RRs and greater R0 resection rates of metastases with the triplet among patients with CRLMs only (36% versus 12%). Moreover, PFS and OS were both significantly improved with FOLFOXIRI. These findings were not confirmed  in a similar Greek phase III trial, which included PS2 patients.132 The addition to bevacizumab in both arms of the TRIBE phase III trial confirmed the higher efficacy of triple ChT backbone, with an improvement in PFS (median: 12.1 months in the tripletebevacizumab group and 9.7 months with FOLFIRIebevacizumab) and in the ORR (65% versus 53%).46 Updated results confirmed a benefit in mOS.133 Within molecular subtypes, the largest mOS was 37.1 months in the RAS and BRAF V600E-wt subgroup, while the BRAF-mutated group had the shortest survival with 13.4 months. Since no prospective trial has included comparison with an arm with FOLFOXIRI without bevacizumab, the
contribution of bevacizumab is considered uncertain.
 
The TRIBE2 phase III study compared an upfront triplet (FOLFOXIRI) followed by a planned maintenance plus the reintroduction of the same regimen after disease progres- sion, versus a sequence of mFOLFOX6 and FOLFIRI doublets, each of the ChT regimens in combination with bevacizumab. This approach favoured the triplet/maintenance/reintro- duction strategy over sequential use for PFS2 (the interval between randomisation and the date of second progres- sion). No interaction was observed between treatment ef- fect and RAS and BRAF V600E mutational status as shown by the post hoc subgroup analyses of the TRIBE trial.134
Triplets including FOLFOXIRI should not be used in pa- tients >75 years old, with PS2 or in patients with significant comorbidities. No phase III evidence supports the use of anti-EGFR mAbs in combination with triplets, as shown in the TRIPLETE trial,135 despite the initial benefit in ORR in the VOLFI phase II trial.136
First-line therapy in dMMR/MSI-H disease. The activity of anti-programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) blockade immunotherapy has been demonstrated on mCRC patients with dMMR/MSI-H status. Phase II trials of nivolumab and pembrolizumab, PD-1 ICIs, in dMMR/MSI-H mCRC patients demonstrated benefit in this small patient subgroup.137,138 In a pivotal phase III trial, 307 previously untreated dMMR/MSI-H mCRC patients were randomised to receive pembrolizumab (administered until progression or up to a maximum of 2 years) or standard therapy (ChT plus targeted agents, according to investigator’s choice). Pembrolizumab demonstrated improvement in the primary endpoint of PFS.12 Although no significant differences in OS were observed, this may be due to the high percentage of crossover in the ChT arm (60% of patients progressing received an ICI). Treatment-related adverse events of grade
3 occurred less frequently with pembrolizumab (22%), compared with the ChT arm (66%). The QoL analysis also favoured the use of pembrolizumab.139

Maintenance therapy
The concept of maintenance treatment has significance for patients with disease not amenable for surgery or LT (see Figure 3). This describes de-escalation of treatment intensity, resulting in improved side-effects and QoL, without relevantly compromising therapeutic efficacy and disease control. This concept evolved from the need to limit the cumulative dose of oxaliplatin cycles, with accumulative neurotoxicity; at that point, the question arose of whether to maintain the remainder or some of the drugs, or completely stop therapy. Patient discussion is essential, explaining the benefits and risks of a maintenance approach.
Studies of maintenance strategies with continuation of ﬂuoropyrimidines after induction ChT, or a complete ChT-free interval, showed contradictory results. In the MRC COIN trial, a combination of continuous oxaliplatineﬂuoropyrimidine was compared with the same treatment followed by a ChT- free interval until progressive disease.118,134 This trial failed to show non-inferiority of the intermittent ChT approach. The OPTIMOX1 trial suggested that a maintenance strategy with
 

 
Figure 3. Management of stage IV unresectable mCRC with maintenance therapy. Purple: general categories or stratification; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white: other aspects of management.
5-FU, ﬂuorouracil; ChT, chemotherapy; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FOLFIRI, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracileirinotecan, mCRC, metastatic colorectal cancer; PD, progressive disease; S-1, tegafuregimeracileoteracil.
aIn patients presenting with cardiotoxicity and/or hand-foot syndrome on 5-FU or capecitabine-based ChT, S-1 may be used as an alternative [III, B].
bDue to the lack of a cumulative toxicity of FOLFIRI.


 

ﬂuoropyrimidines could be considered after induction ChT with FOLFOX. However, the OPTIMOX2 trial explored short induction FOLFOX7, followed by a maintenance strategy with 5-FUeLV or a ChT-free interval, confirming the negative impact of the ChT-free interval on the median duration of disease control and survival.140
The role of biologicals in maintenance strategies was tested. Bevacizumab maintenance was explored after first- line induction ChTebevacizumab in the SAKK 41/06 and PRODIGE 9 phase III trials showing no differences in disease control duration, concluding that single-agent bevacizumab has no meaningful therapeutic value.141,142 In the CAIRO3 study, maintenance treatment with capecitabinee bevacizumab was compared with a complete break, showing an improvement in the primary endpoint of PFS2.143 In the AIO 0207 trial, after first-line induction with oxaliplatin- based ChTebevacizumab, patients were randomly assigned to either maintenance with ﬂuoropyrimidinesebevacizumab, bevacizumab alone or observation. The primary endpoint was to show non-inferiority for time to strategy failure with bevacizumab alone compared with ﬂuoropyrimidineebev- acizumab.144 Its results support ﬂuoropyrimidinee
 

bevacizumab as the preferable option. There are no phase III data to support maintenance treatment with anti-EGFR mAbs, although two phase II randomised trials have shown that maintenance with 5-FUeanti-EGFR is better than 5-FU or anti-EGFR alone.145,146

Second-line treatment
The benefit of delivering second-line treatment to fit pa- tients with no significant comorbidities has been demon- strated in multiple trials. Proposed treatment strategies in the second line are shown in Figure 4. The ChT backbone depends mainly on the first-line treatment received. With first-line oxaliplatin-based therapy, second-line treatment with irinotecan with ﬂuoropyrimidine or monotherapy would be advisable. Conversely, those treated with first-line irinotecan-based could receive oxaliplatin-based treatment (FOLFOX or CAPOX) in second line if no contraindications.
Anti-EGFR. The anti-EGFR mAbs cetuximab and pan- itumumab have demonstrated activity in the second-line (or later-line) treatment of mCRC in RAS-wt tumours, as single agents and in combination with ChT. The EPIC phase III trial
 

 
Figure 4. Management of stage IV unresectable mCRC in the second line. Purple: general categories or stratification; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white: other aspects of management.
5-FU, ﬂuorouracil; CAPOX, capecitabineeoxaliplatin; ChT, chemotherapy; dMMR, deficient mismatch repair; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; FOLFIRI, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracileirinotecan; FOLFOX, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracile oxaliplatin; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale; mCRC, metastatic colorectal cancer; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; mut, mutant; PD, progressive disease; PTL, primary tumour location; S-1, tegafuregimeracileoteracil; wt, wild-type.
aIn patients presenting with cardiotoxicity and/or hand-foot syndrome on 5-FU or capecitabine-based ChT, S-1 may be used as an alternative [III, B].
bESMO-MCBS v1.1165 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
cFOLFOX or CAPOX, if no contraindications.
dBevacizumab can be combined with ChT doublet (a ﬂuoropyrimidine with oxaliplatin or irinotecan, depending on the first-line ChT backbone delivered) [I, A; ESMO- MCBS v1.1 score: 1].
eWith or without previous first-line treatment with bevacizumab and independently of RAS mutational status and the PTL.
fESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been defined by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.164 See Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003, for more information on ESCAT scores. gIndicated for immunotherapy-naive patients.


 
explored second-line treatment with irinotecan, with or without cetuximab, in patients refractory to first-line oxa- liplatineﬂuoropyrimidine-based treatment.147 While OS was not increased, almost half of the control arm received cetuximab post-progression and this addition of cetuximab improved PFS and RR.147
Second-line FOLFIRI with or without panitumumab was tested in a phase III trial.148 In KRAS-wt patients, pan- itumumab significantly improved RR and PFS with a non- significant trend toward longer OS.
Anti-VEGF. In patients previously treated with irinotecane
ﬂuoropyrimidine-based   ChT   alone,   a   combination   of
 
FOLFOXebevacizumab demonstrated improved OS and PFS in a phase III trial in comparison with FOLFOX4.149
In patients previously treated with bevacizumab (in the first-line setting), maintaining bevacizumab in combination with second-line ChT (oxaliplatin or irinotecan-based, switching depending on the first-line treatment delivered) demonstrated improvement in the primary endpoint of OS.150
Aﬂibercept is a recombinant fusion protein   that blocks the activity of VEGF-A and B, as well as placental growth factor, by acting as a high-affinity ligand trap. The VELOUR phase III trial reported improvement in OS and PFS with aﬂibercept in combination with FOLFIRI, in
 

 
mCRC patients previously treated with oxaliplatin, including the subgroup of patients previously treated with bevacizumab.151
The RAISE phase III trial tested ramucirumab, a human mAb that targets the extracellular domain of VEGF receptor 2, in combination with FOLFIRI in mCRC patients with dis- ease progression during or after first-line therapy with bevacizumabeoxaliplatineﬂuoropyrimidines.152 A benefit in both OS and PFS was observed.
Each of these antiangiogenics in combination with ChT has demonstrated improved OS in the second-line treat- ment of mCRC, irrespective of the first-line treatment. In case of RAS-mutated tumours with a rapid progression while on bevacizumab first-line treatment, second-line therapy with ChT combined with aﬂibercept or ramucir- umab could be considered, as those trials included patients with a rapid progression while on first-line treatment with bevacizumab.
In RAS-wt patients treated upfront with bevacizumab, second-line treatment with antiangiogenics or anti-EGFR mAbs combined with ChT are good options. Treatment with anti-EGFR mAbs can increase the RR, although the benefit is more extensive in left-sided tumours. In right- sided tumours a combination with ChT and an anti-VEGF could be a better option. The side-effects profile should also be considered in this decision. In dMMR/MSI-H tu- mours progressing after first-line ChT, the European Medi- cines Agency (EMA) approved the use of ipilimumabe nivolumab.153
BRAF V600E-mutated mCRC. As described, the presence of BRAF mutations is associated with a poor prognosis in mCRC, and current therapies have demonstrated less effectiveness in these patients. New strategies blocking the BRAF signalling pathway have shown preliminary ac- tivity.154,155 A phase III study in BRAF-mutant patients progressing after first- or second-line treatment tested the combination of encorafenib (an oral BRAF V600E inhibi- tor), with binimetinib and cetuximab.156 Patients were randomly assigned (1 : 1 : 1) to receive encorafenibe cetuximab with or without binimetinib (doublet or triplet) versus ChT (FOLFIRI or irinotecan) plus cetuximab. OS was significantly superior in the experimental arms, either doublet or triplet, compared with standard of care. The mOS was 9.3 months in the experimental arms and
5.9 months in the control group. A confirmed significantly
better ORR was reported as 26.8% in the triplet arm, 19.5% in the doublet, versus 1.8% in the control group. The QoL was not deteriorated in the experimental arm and grade 3 adverse events reported were higher in the standard arm (61%) compared with the doublet (50%) or triplet treatment (58%). This study led to the approval of encorafenibecetuximab for BRAF V600E pre-treated mCRC; further studies are ongoing to test this combina- tion in early phases of metastatic disease. Patients with BRAF-mutant tumours and MSI-H status, who are receiving first-line immunotherapy, could also benefit from encorafenibecetuximab upon progression.
 
Third- and further-line treatment
Proposed treatment strategies for third and further lines are shown in Figure 5.
Reintroduction of the initial induction therapy can be considered after second-line therapy, in patients who did not progress during the course of first-line ChT.
Anti-EGFRs. Both cetuximab and panitumumab as single agents have demonstrated activity in mCRC after previous treatment with standard ChT. In comparison with best supportive care (BSC), cetuximab monotherapy improved OS and PFS, whilst preserving QoL with less deterioration in physical function and global health status scores.110 Pan- itumumab was also compared with BSC in mCRC patients who had been previously treated with standard ChT, showing an increase in PFS and ORR. No difference in OS was observed, probably due to crossover.109 This benefit in PFS as well as in OS was observed only in the KRAS-wt population for both cetuximab and panitumumab.3,4 In RAS-wt patients not previously treated with anti-EGFR mAbs, in the third or further lines, a combination of irinotecanecetuximab was superior to cetuximab mono- therapy in ORR and PFS, but not in OS. Therefore, a com- bination of irinotecanecetuximab can be used in this setting.157 Similarly, rechallenge with anti-EGFR mAbs has shown initial good outcomes in RAS-wt patients according to liquid biopsy testing in small non-randomised studies.158,159
Regorafenib. Regorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor that demonstrated activity in refractory mCRC in a phase III placebo-controlled trial, showing an increase in mOS and PFS over BSC.160 Another phase III trial confirmed a benefit on OS with regorafenib in comparison with placebo. The most common grade 3 adverse events were hand-foot syndrome, hypertension, fatigue, diarrhoea, hyperbilirubinaemia, increased liver enzymes and rash.161 This treatment could be a possibility in fit patients with refractory disease after standard ChT with 5-FUeirinotecaneoxaliplatin, with or without anti-VEGF therapies or anti-EGFR mAbs.
Triﬂuridineetipiracil (TAS-102). TAS-102 is an oral agent that combines triﬂuridine, a thymidine-based nucleoside analogue, with tipiracil hydrochloride, a novel thymidine phosphorylase inhibitor that improves the bioavailability of triﬂuridine. TAS-102 has demonstrated improved PFS and OS in refractory mCRC in a phase III trial.162 The most frequently observed adverse events are neutropaenia and leukopaenia and, much less frequently, febrile neu- tropaenia. A similar phase III trial confirmed a longer mOS and a lower risk of death for those patients treated with TAS-102 compared with placebo.163
HER2-positive mCRC. Amplification of HER2 is a rare con- dition in mCRC. Therapies with HER2 blockade have shown significant antitumour activity: a dual blockade of HER2 with a combination of trastuzumab, an anti-HER2 mAb and the tyrosine kinase inhibitor lapatinib, in a population of pa- tients with KRAS exon 2-wt and HER2-positive mCRC
 

 
Figure 5. Management of stage IV unresectable mCRC in third-line therapy and beyond. Purple: general categories or stratification; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white: other aspects of management.
EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; mAb, monoclonal antibody; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale; mCRC, metastatic colorectal cancer; mut, mutant; PD, progressive disease; wt, wild-type.
aFor a summary of recommended anti-HER2 regimens for mCRC see Supplementary Table S6, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003.
bESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been defined by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.164 See Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003, for more information on ESCAT scores. cIn RAS-wt patients not previously treated with anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies.
dESMO-MCBS v1.1165 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
eTreatment for BRAF-mut patients if not used in the second line.

 

refractory to standard of care, led to an ORR (partial or complete) of 30%, and disease stability in an additional 44% of patients.14 A summary of HER2 blockade studies is pro- vided in Supplementary Table S6, available at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003.


Recommendations
First-line therapy
Determining the RAS mutational status on a tumour bi- opsy [I, A] (or through a liquid biopsy in case no tumour sample is available [II, B]) is mandatory to guide the best treatment decision.
Delivering a biological therapy in combination with ChT in the first-line setting is recommended, unless contrain- dicated [I, A].
In the majority of patients, first-line treatment will consist of a doublet of ChT (FOLFOX, FOLFIRI, CAPOX) that can be combined with an anti-VEGF or anti-EGFR mAb [I, B; for FOLFIRIecetuximab ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS) v1.1 score: 4; FOLFOX4epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; modified FOLFOX6epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
In RAS-wt and BRAF-wt left-sided tumours, doublet ChT plus an anti-EGFR mAb is the preferred option [I, A]. Due
 

to increased side-effects and lack of efficacy, combina- tion with cetuximabecapecitabine or bolus 5-FU-based ChT is not recommended [I, E].
In RAS-wt right-sided tumours, ChT bevacizumab is the preferred option [II, B]; although in cases in which a higher response is needed for conversion therapy, a doublet with cetuximab or panitumumab can be used [II, C].
Anti-EGFR mAbs can be combined with the doublets FOLFOX or FOLFIRI [I, A; FOLFOX4epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; modified FOLFOX6epanitu- mumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; for FOLFIRIecetuxi- mab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].
Bevacizumab can be combined with single ﬂuoropyrimi- dines, irinotecan or oxaliplatin-based doublet of ChT (FOLFOX, CAPOX, FOLFIRI) or triplets (FOLOXIRI) [I, B].
Combining anti-VEGF plus anti-EGFR mAbs is not recom- mended [I, E].
A triplet with FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab could also be an option for selective patients with good PS and without comorbidities [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2]. Triplets including FOLFOXIRI should not be used in pa- tients >75 years old, with PS2 or in patients with signif- icant comorbidities [IV, E].
In selected cases, when downstaging is the objective or in right-sided colon cancer with BRAF V600E mutations,
 

 
a triplet (FOLFOXIRI), which can be combined with bev- acizumab, should be considered, but a doublet plus bev- acizumab could provide similar outcomes [II, B].
Triplets with FOLFOXIRI and anti-EGFR mAbs are not rec- ommended [I, D].
In patients with comorbidities, older age or with meta- static disease not amenable to a curative treatment strategy and no significant disease-related symptoms, monotherapy with a ﬂuoropyrimidine bevacizumab can be used [I, B]. In frail or elderly patients unable to tolerate ChT, whose tumours are left-sided and RAS-wt, monotherapy with anti-EGFR mAbs can be considered [IV, C].
In patients presenting with cardiotoxicity and/or hand- foot syndrome on 5-FU or capecitabine-based ChT, S-1 may be used as an alternative [III, B].
Patients should receive all available treatments during the course of the disease [I, B].
In dMMR/MSI-H mCRC patients, the ICI pembrolizumab has demonstrated benefit over standard ChT and tar- geted agents, in the first-line setting and it is recommen- ded as standard of care [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; ESCAT: I-A].
Maintenance therapy
After first-line therapy with ChT based on oxaliplatine bevacizumab, maintenance therapy with a ﬂuoropyrimi- dine and bevacizumab could be considered in non- progressive patients after at least 4 months of treatment [I, B].
After first-line therapy with ChT based on oxaliplatin plus anti-EGFR mAbs, maintenance therapy with a ﬂuoropyr- imidine plus anti-EGFR mAbs could be considered in non- progressive patients [II, B].
When FOLFIRI is used in first-line treatment, due to the lack of a cumulative toxicity, we should continue irinote- can full therapy until progressive disease [V, B].
Reintroduction of an initial successful induction therapy should be done after progressive disease while on main- tenance therapy [III, B].
Second-line treatment
In patients treated with first-line oxaliplatin-based ther- apy, second-line treatment with irinotecan-based or monotherapy is recommended. On the contrary, those patients treated with irinotecan-based in first line could receive an oxaliplatin-based treatment (FOLFOX or CAPOX) in second line if no contraindications [II, A].
In RAS-wt patients not previously treated with an anti- EGFR mAb, treatment with ChT (FOLFIRI or irinotecan) and cetuximab or panitumumab could be considered for left-sided colon tumours [II, C]. For right-sided tumours, second-line therapy with an anti-angiogenic combined with ChT is recommended [II, B].
In patients previously treated with irinotecaneﬂuoropyr- imidine-based ChT alone, a combination of FOLFOXe bevacizumab is recommended [I, A].
 
A second-line treatment with an antiangiogenic com- bined with ChT, regardless of whether the first-line treat- ment included bevacizumab or not, should be used, independently of the RAS mutational status and the PTL [I, A].
Bevacizumab can be combined with a ﬂuoropyrimidine- doublet with oxaliplatin or irinotecan, depending on the first-line ChT backbone delivered [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1].
Aﬂibercept or ramucirumab in combination with FOLFIRI could be used as an alternative to bevacizumab with FOLFIRI in patients progressing on first-line treatment with oxaliplatin-based ChT [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1].
For BRAF V600E-mutated, pre-treated mCRC patients, encorafenibecetuximab is recommended as the best op- tion in second line [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; ESCAT: I-A].
For dMMR/MSI-H tumours progressing after first-line ChT, ipilimumabenivolumab is recommended [III, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score 3].
Third- and further-line treatment
Reintroduction of the initial induction therapy can be considered after second-line therapy, as long as the pa- tient did not progress during the induction course of first-line ChT [III, B].
Regorafenib is recommended in patients pre-treated with ﬂuoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin, irinotecan and bio- logics, if available, or in earlier lines of therapy following oxaliplatin and irinotecan regimen failure, depending on local approvals [I, A, ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1].
Triﬂuridineetipiracil is recommended in patients pre- treated with ﬂuoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin, irinotecan and biologics, if available, or in earlier lines of therapy following oxaliplatin and irinotecan regimen failure, depending on local approvals [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
For BRAF V600E-mutated, pre-treated mCRC patients, encorafenibecetuximab is recommended as the best op- tion in third line [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; ESCAT: I-A].
In RAS-wt and BRAF-wt patients not previously treated with EGFR antibodies, cetuximab and panitumumab are recommended as single agents [I, A; panitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
In irinotecan-refractory patients, cetuximabeirinotecan is recommended over cetuximab alone [II, B].
Administering an alternative anti-EGFR antibody, if a pa- tient is refractory to one of the other anti-EGFR anti- bodies, is not recommended [I, E].
In patients maintaining RAS-wt status, rechallenge with anti-EGFR mAbs may be an option in selected patients [III, C].
In HER2-positive patients with mCRC, treatment with HER2 dual blockade is optionally recommended, espe- cially in RAS-wt tumours [III, C; ESCAT: II-B].
 

 
FOLLOW-UP, LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND SURVIVORSHIP
The survivorship goals include physical evaluation and management of the long-term toxicities related to sur- gery, LTs, ChT, targeted agents or immunotherapy. If the patient is receiving an active treatment, radiological evaluation should be carried out every 8-12 weeks, including (in most cases) CT scan or MRI, as well as the measurement of CEA levels. Patients with a radically resected metastatic disease with potential for cure may initially merit more intense monitoring with radiological assessment with CT (or MRI) and measurement of CEA levels every 3 months during the first 2 years and every 6 months thereafter.19

Recommendations
For patients receiving active treatment, radiological evaluation should be carried out every 8-12 weeks, including (in most cases) CT scan or MRI, as well as the measurement of CEA levels [IV, B].
Patients with a radically resected metastatic disease with potential for cure merit more intense monitoring initially with radiological assessment with CT (or MRI) and mea- surement of CEA levels every 3 months during the first 2 years and every 6 months thereafter [I, A].

METHODOLOGY
This CPG was developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for CPG development (https://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Meth odology). The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. A table of ESCAT scores is included in Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003. ESCAT scores have been defined by the authors and validated by the ESMO Trans- lational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.164 A table of ESMO-MCBS scores is included in Supplementary Table S7, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc. 2022.10.003. ESMO-MCBS v1.1165 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (https://www. esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-MCBS). The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and vali- dated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee. The FDA/EMA or other regulatory body approval status of new therapies/ indications is reported at the time of writing this CPG. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Supplementary Table S8, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc. 2022.10.003.166,167 Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the au- thors. For future updates to this CPG, including eUpdates and Living Guidelines, please see the ESMO Guidelines website: https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/guidelines-by- topic/gastrointestinal-cancers/metastatic-colorectal-cancer.
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Manuscript editing support was provided by Claire Bramley, Catherine Evans and Richard Lutz (ESMO Guidelines staff). Nathan Cherny, Chair of the ESMO-MCBS Working Group, Urania Dafni and Giota Zygoura of Frontier Science Foun- dation Hellas provided review and validation of the ESMO- MCBS scores. Nicola Latino (ESMO Scientific Affairs staff) provided coordination and support of the ESMO-MCBS scores and Angela Corstorphine of Kstorfin Medical Com- munications Ltd. provided medical writing and editing support in the preparation of the ESMO-MCBS table; this support was funded by ESMO. Dr Benedikt Westphalen and Dr Noelia Tarazona (members of the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group) and Dr Svetlana Jezdic (ESMO Medical Affairs Advisor) provided validation support for ESCAT scores.

FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation of this guideline. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.

DISCLOSURE
AC reports fees paid to his institution as an invited speaker from Amgen, Foundation Medicine, Merck Serono and Roche; fees paid to his institution for advisory board membership from Amgen, AnHeart Therapeutics, Merck Serono, Roche and Transgene; personal fees for editorial roles as Associate Editor for Annals of Oncology and ESMO Open and as Editor for Cancer Treatment Reviews; institu- tional funding as principal investigator (PI) from Actuate Therapeutic, Adaptimmune, Amcure, Amgen, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bayer, BeiGene, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), FibroGen, Genentech, Lilly, MedImmune, Merck Serono, Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Natera, Novartis, Servier, Sierra Oncology and Takeda; he reports a non-remunerated role as General and Scientific Director of INCLIVA Biomed- ical Research Institute. RA reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Merck Serono and Sanofi. SR reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen, MSD and Servier; personal fees for advisory board membership from Amgen, Servier and Sirtex; institutional funding as a local PI from Ability Pharmaceuticals, Astellas, G1 Therapeutics, Hutchinson, Menarini, Mirati, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Roche and Seagen. DA reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boston Scientific, BMS, Ipsen, Merck Serono, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Samsung Bioepis, Sanofi (Genzyme), Servier and Terumo; personal fees as an invited speaker and continued medical education (CME) provider from ACE Oncology, Aptitude Health, Art Tempi Media, Clinical Care Options, From Research to Practice, Imedex, MedAhead (Austria), PRMA Consulting, Streamitup (Germany), Tactic MD LLC, WebMD Health Corp; personal fees for advisory board membership from Astra- Zeneca, Boston Scientific, BMS, CRA International, Ketchum, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Samsung Bioepis, Sanofi (Genzyme) and
 

 
Terumo; personal fees for advisory board membership, CME provider and App producer from onkowissen; personal fees for editorial roles as an Associate Editor for Annals of Oncology, ESMO Open and Clinical Colorectal Cancer; institutional funding from AbbVie and as a local PI from BMS and Pierre Fabre, as a coordinating PI from OncoLytics and as a   Steering   Committee   member   from   Roche; he reports fees paid to his institution as Chair of the Data Safety Monitoring Board from Sanofi (Genzyme); non-remunerated activities as a project lead with Onco- Lytics, member of the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Hämatologie und Medizinische Onkologie (DGHO), European School of Oncology (ESO) and a leadership role and Steering Com- mittee membership with the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Inter- nistische Onkologie in der Deutschen Krebsgesellschaft (AIO) and European Organisation for Research and Treat- ment of Cancer (EORTC) gastrointestinal group. NN reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Eli Lilly, Illumina, Merck, MSD and Thermo Fisher; personal fees for advisory board membership from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bio- cartis, Incyte, Novartis and Roche; institutional funding from AstraZeneca, Biocartis, Blueprint, Illumina, Incyte, Merck, Qiagen, Roche and Thermo Fisher; and non-remunerated activities as President of International Quality Network of Pathology (IQN Path) and President of the Società Italiana di Cancerologia (SIC). JT reports personal fees as an invited speaker and for advisory board membership from Amgen, BMS, Merck, MSD, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Roche and Serv- ier; non-remunerated activities as Chair of the Aide et Recherche en Cancérologie Digestive (ARCAD) Foundation pancreas research group, president of the scientific com- mittee for the ARCAD foundation and as member of the administrative council, scientific committee, executive board responsible for international relationships/partner- ships for the Federation Francophone de Cancerologie Digestive (FFCD) in the PRODIGE Intergroup for the FFCD. JS reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Merck Serono, Pierre Fabre and Servier; personal fees for advisory board membership from Pierre Fabre, Ventana and Zentalis; personal fees for consultancy and review of guidelines from Roche Diagnostics; personal fees for CME activities from GI Connect; personal fees for expert testimony from Seagen; personal fees for travel expenses from BMS and Servier; institutional funding from Pierre Fabre. TDB reports per- sonal fees as an invited speaker from Boston Scientific and GE Healthcare; personal fees for advisory board member- ship from Guerbet, Quantum Surgical and Terumo; institu- tional funding from Quantum Surgical and Terumo. PO reports personal fees as an invited speaker from BMS Eisai, Fresenius Kabi, Nordic Drugs, Novartis, Nutricia, Roche and Servier; personal feels for advisory board membership from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Daiichi Sankyo (in collaboration with AstraZeneca), Eisai, Incyte, Merck, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Sanofi and Sobi; and personal fees for expert testi- mony for the Finnish Medicines Agency from BMS; she re- ports institutional funding for research grants from Amgen and Servier; as a local PI from Incyte and as a coordinating
 
PI from Pfizer and Roche; she reports non-remunerated activities as a member of the Colores patient advocacy group and as a Board Member of the Finnish Cancer Soci- ety. TY reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Bayer, Chugai, Merck Biopharma, MSD and Ono; institu- tional funding from Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai, Daiichi Sankyo, Genomedia, MSD, Ono, Sysmex and Taiho and as a local PI from Chugai, Daiichi Sankyo, Ono, Pfizer and Sanofi. EM reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Bayer, ESMO, Incyte, Merck S.p.A., Merck Serono, Pierre Fabre, Roche and Servier; personal fees for writing engagements from AstraZeneca, Incyte, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Roche and Servier; personal fees for advisory board mem- bership from Amgen, Incyte, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Roche and Servier.

REFERENCES
1.	Sung H, Ferlay J, Siegel RL, et al. Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2021;71(3):209- 249.
2.	Malvezzi M, Carioli G, Bertuccio P, et al. European cancer mortality predictions for the year 2018 with focus on colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(4):1016-1022.
3.	Amado RG, Wolf M, Peeters M, et al. Wild-type KRAS is required for panitumumab efficacy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(10):1626-1634.
4.	Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ, et al. K-ras mutations and benefit from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(17):1757-1765.
5.	Douillard JY, Siena S, Cassidy J, et al. Randomised, phase III trial of panitumumab with infusional ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX4) versus FOLFOX4 alone as first-line treatment in patients with previously untreated metastatic colorectal cancer: the PRIME study. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(31):4697-4705.
6.	Normanno N, Esposito Abate R, Lambiase M, et al. RAS testing of liquid biopsy correlates with the outcome of metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with first-line FOLFIRI plus cetuximab in the CAPRI-GOIM trial. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(1):112-118.
7.	Maurel J, Alonso V, Escudero P, et al. Clinical impact of circulating tumour RAS and BRAF mutation dynamics in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer treated with first-line chemotherapy plus anti- epidermal growth factor receptor therapy. JCO Precis Oncol. 2019;3: 1-16.
8.	Bachet JB, Bouche O, Taieb J, et al. RAS mutation analysis in circu- lating tumour DNA from patients with metastatic colorectal cancer: the AGEO RASANC prospective multicenter study. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(5):1211-1219.
9.	Kopetz S, Grothey A, Yaeger R, et al. Encorafenib, binimetinib, and cetuximab in BRAF V600E-mutated colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(17):1632-1643.
10.	Schirripa M, Biason P, Lonardi S, et al. Class 1, 2, and 3 BRAF-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: a detailed clinical, pathologic, and mo- lecular characterization. Clin Cancer Res. 2019;25(13):3954-3961.
11.	Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H, et al. PD-1 blockade in tumours with mismatch-repair deficiency. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(26):2509-2520.
12.	André T, Shiu K-K, Kim TW, et al. Pembrolizumab in microsatellite- instabilityehigh advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2020;383(23):2207-2218.
13.	Stjepanovic N, Moreira L, Carneiro F, et al. Hereditary gastrointestinal cancers: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2019;30(10):1558-1571.
14.	Sartore-Bianchi A, Trusolino L, Martino C, et al. Dual-targeted therapy with trastuzumab and lapatinib in treatment-refractory, KRAS codon 12/13 wild-type, HER2-positive metastatic colorectal cancer
 

 
(HERACLES): a proof-of-concept, multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(6):738-746.
15.	Pietrantonio F, Di Nicolantonio F, Schrock AB, et al. ALK, ROS1, and NTRK rearrangements in metastatic colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2017;109(12). https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djx089.
16.	Marchiò C, Scaltriti M, Ladanyi M, et al. ESMO recommendations on the standard methods to detect NTRK fusions in daily practice and clinical research. Ann Oncol. 2019;30(9):1417-1427.
17.	Hong DS, DuBois SG, Kummar S, et al. Larotrectinib in patients with TRK fusion-positive solid tumours: a pooled analysis of three phase 1/ 2 clinical trials. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(4):531-540.
18.	Doebele RC, Drilon A, Paz-Ares L, et al. Entrectinib in patients with advanced or metastatic NTRK fusion-positive solid tumours: inte- grated analysis of three phase 1-2 trials. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(2): 271-282.
19.	Argilés G, Tabernero J, Labianca R, et al. Localised colon cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2020;31(10):1291-1305.
20.	Niekel MC, Bipat S, Stoker J. Diagnostic imaging of colorectal liver metastases with CT, MR imaging, FDG PET, and/or FDG PET/CT: a meta-analysis of prospective studies including patients who have not previously undergone treatment. Radiology. 2010;257(3):674- 684.
21.	Duffy MJ, Lamerz R, Haglund C, et al. Tumour markers in colorectal cancer, gastric cancer and gastrointestinal stromal cancers: European group on tumour markers 2014 guidelines update. Int J Cancer. 2014;134(11):2513-2522.
22.	Arnold D, Lueza B, Douillard JY, et al. Prognostic and predictive value of primary tumour side in patients with RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer treated with chemotherapy and EGFR directed an- tibodies in six randomised trials. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(8):1713-1729.
23.	Dienstmann R, Vermeulen L, Guinney J, et al. Consensus molecular subtypes and the evolution of precision medicine in colorectal cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2017;17(2):79-92.
24.	Xu H, Xia Z, Jia X, et al. Primary tumour resection is associated with improved survival in stage IV colorectal cancer: an instrumental variable analysis. Sci Rep. 2015;5:16516.
25.	Yi C, Li J, Tang F, et al. Is primary tumour excision and specific me- tastases sites resection associated with improved survival in stage Ⅳ colorectal cancer? Results from SEER database analysis. Am Surg. 2020;86(5):499-507.
26.	Faron M, Pignon JP, Malka D, et al. Is primary tumour resection associated with survival improvement in patients with colorectal cancer and unresectable synchronous metastases? A pooled analysis of individual data from four randomised trials. Eur J Cancer. 2015;51(2):166-176.
27.	Kanemitsu Y, Shitara K, Mizusawa J, et al. Primary tumour resection plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for colorectal cancer patients with asymptomatic, synchronous unresectable metastases (JCOG1007; iPACS): a randomised clinical trial. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(10):1098-1107.
28.	Rahbari NN, Biondo S, Feißt M, et al. Randomised clinical trial on resection of the primary tumour versus no resection prior to systemic therapy in patients with colon cancer and synchronous unresectable metastases. J Clin Oncol. 2022;40(17_suppl):LBA3507.
29.	Prades J, Borras JM. Shifting sands: adapting the multidisciplinary team model to technological and organizational innovations in cancer care. Future Oncol. 2014;10(13):1995-1998.
30.	Beets G, Sebag-Montefiore D, Andritsch E, et al. ECCO essential re- quirements for quality cancer care: colorectal cancer. A critical review. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2017;110:81-93.
31.	Shah S, Arora S, Atkin G, et al. Decision-making in colorectal cancer tumour board meetings: results of a prospective observational assessment. Surg Endosc. 2014;28(10):2783-2788.
32.	Osterlund P, Salminen T, Soveri LM, et al. Repeated centralized multidisciplinary team assessment of resectability, clinical behavior, and outcomes in 1086 Finnish metastatic colorectal cancer patients (RAXO): a nationwide prospective intervention study. Lancet Reg Health Eur. 2021;3:100049.
33.	 
Adam R, De Gramont A, Figueras J, et al. The oncosurgery approach to managing liver metastases from colorectal cancer: a multidisci- plinary international consensus. Oncologist. 2012;17(10):1225-1239.
34.	Nordlinger B, Sorbye H, Glimelius B, et al. Perioperative chemo- therapy with FOLFOX4 and surgery versus surgery alone for resect- able liver metastases from colorectal cancer (EORTC Intergroup trial 40983): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9617):1007- 1016.
35.	Primrose J, Falk S, Finch-Jones M, et al. Systemic chemotherapy with or without cetuximab in patients with resectable colorectal liver metastasis: the New EPOC randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15(6):601-611.
36.	Adam R, de Gramont A, Figueras J, et al. Managing synchronous liver metastases from colorectal cancer: a multidisciplinary international consensus. Cancer Treat Rev. 2015;41(9):729-741.
37.	Cao C, Yan TD, Black D, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of cytoreductive surgery with perioperative intraperitoneal chemo- therapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis of colorectal origin. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009;16(8):2152-2165.
38.	Cotte E, Passot G, Mohamed F, et al. Management of peritoneal carcinomatosis from colorectal cancer: current state of practice. Cancer J. 2009;15(3):243-248.
39.	Elias D, Lefevre JH, Chevalier J, et al. Complete cytoreductive surgery plus intraperitoneal chemohyperthermia with oxaliplatin for peritoneal carcinomatosis of colorectal origin. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(5):681-685.
40.	Quenet F, Elias D, Roca L, et al. Cytoreductive surgery plus hyper- thermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy versus cytoreductive surgery alone for colorectal peritoneal metastases (PRODIGE 7): a multi- centre, randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2021;22(2):256-266.
41.	Nordlinger B, Sorbye H, Glimelius B, et al. Perioperative FOLFOX4 chemotherapy and surgery versus surgery alone for resectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer (EORTC 40983): long-term results of a randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(12): 1208-1215.
42.	Bridgewater JA, Pugh SA, Maishman T, et al. Systemic chemotherapy with or without cetuximab in patients with resectable colorectal liver metastasis (New EPOC): long-term results of a multicentre, randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(3):398- 411.
43.	Stintzing S, Modest DP, Rossius L, et al. FOLFIRI plus cetuximab versus FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab for metastatic colorectal cancer (FIRE-3): a post-hoc analysis of tumour dynamics in the final RAS wild-type subgroup of this randomised open-label phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(10):1426-1434.
44.	Lenz H, Niedzwiecki D, Innocenti F, et al. Calgb/Swog 80405: phase III trial of irinotecan/5-FU/leucovorin (FOLFIRI) or oxaliplatin/5-FU/leucovorin (mFOLFOX6) with bevacizumab (BV) or cetuximab (CET) for patients (Pts) with expanded Ras analyses untreated metastatic adenocarcinoma of the colon or rectum (MCRC). Ann Oncol. 2014;25(4):v1.
45.	Falcone A, Ricci S, Brunetti I, et al. Phase III trial of infusional ﬂuo- rouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan (FOLFOXIRI) compared with infusional ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan (FOLFIRI) as first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer: the Gruppo Oncologico Nord Ovest. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(13):1670-1676.
46.	Loupakis F, Cremolini C, Masi G, et al. Initial therapy with FOLFOXIRI and bevacizumab for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(17):1609-1618.
47.	Gruenberger T, Bridgewater J, Chau I, et al. Bevacizumab plus mFOLFOX-6 or FOLFOXIRI in patients with initially unresectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer: the OLIVIA multinational rando- mised phase II trial. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(4):702-708.
48.	Ducreux M, Ychou M, Laplanche A, et al. Hepatic arterial oxaliplatin infusion plus intravenous chemotherapy in colorectal cancer with inoperable hepatic metastases: a trial of the gastrointestinal group of the Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23(22):4881-4887.
49.	Lévi FA, Boige V, Hebbar M, et al. Conversion to resection of liver metastases from colorectal cancer with hepatic artery infusion of
 

 
combined chemotherapy and systemic cetuximab in multicenter trial OPTILIV. Ann Oncol. 2016;27(2):267-274.
50.	Jones RP, Vauthey JN, Adam R, et al. Effect of specialist decision- making on treatment strategies for colorectal liver metastases. Br J Surg. 2012;99(9):1263-1269.
51.	Modest DP, Denecke T, Pratschke J, et al. Surgical treatment options following chemotherapy plus cetuximab or bevacizumab in meta- static colorectal cancer-central evaluation of FIRE-3. Eur J Cancer. 2018;88:77-86.
52.	Goéré D, Pignon JP, Gelli M, et al. Postoperative hepatic arterial chemotherapy in high-risk patients as adjuvant treatment after resection of colorectal liver metastases - a randomised phase II/III trial - PACHA-01 (NCT02494973). BMC Cancer. 2018;18(1):787.
53.	Wong SL, Mangu PB, Choti MA, et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology 2009 clinical evidence review on radiofrequency ablation of hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(3): 493-508.
54.	de Baère T, Aupérin A, Deschamps F, et al. Radiofrequency ablation is a valid treatment option for lung metastases: experience in 566 pa- tients with 1037 metastases. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(5):987-991.
55.	Shady W, Petre EN, Do KG, et al. Percutaneous microwave versus radiofrequency ablation of colorectal liver metastases: ablation with clear margins (A0) provides the best local tumour control. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2018;29(2):268-275.e1.
56.	de Baere T, Tselikas L, Woodrum D, et al. Evaluating cryoablation of metastatic lung tumours in patientsdsafety and efficacy: the ECLIPSE trialdinterim analysis at 1 year. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;10(10):1468-1474.
57.	Kobiela J, Spychalski P, Marvaso G, et al. Ablative stereotactic radio- therapy for oligometastatic colorectal cancer: systematic review. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2018;129:91-101.
58.	Tree AC, Khoo VS, Eeles RA, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for oligometastases. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(1):e28-e37.
59.	Khattak MA, Martin HL, Beeke C, et al. Survival differences in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer and with single site metastatic disease at initial presentation: results from South Australian Clinical Registry for Advanced Colorectal Cancer. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2012;11(4):247-254.
60.	Price TJ, Townsend AR, Beeke C, et al. “Watchful waiting” for meta- static colorectal cancer, antediluvian or an option to be considered again? Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2012;8(1):10-13.
61.	Weiser MR, Jarnagin WR, Saltz LB. Colorectal cancer patients with oligometastatic liver disease: what is the optimal approach? Oncology (Williston Park). 2013;27(11):1074-1078.
62.	Fonck M, Perez JT, Catena V, et al. Pulmonary thermal ablation en- ables long chemotherapy-free survival in metastatic colorectal cancer patients. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2018;41(11):1727-1734.
63.	Tanis E, Nordlinger B, Mauer M, et al. Local recurrence rates after radiofrequency ablation or resection of colorectal liver metastases. Analysis of the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer #40004 and #40983. Eur J Cancer. 2014;50(5):912-919.
64.	Shady W, Petre EN, Gonen M, et al. Percutaneous radiofrequency ablation of colorectal cancer liver metastases: factors affecting out- comes–a 10-year experience at a single center. Radiology. 2016;278(2):601-611.
65.	Ruers T, Van Coevorden F, Punt CJA, et al. Local treatment of unre- sectable colorectal liver metastases: results of a randomised phase II trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2017;109(9):djx015.
66.	Evrard S, Poston G, Kissmeyer-Nielsen P, et al. Combined ablation and resection (CARe) as an effective parenchymal sparing treatment for extensive colorectal liver metastases. PLoS One. 2014;9(12):e114404.
67.	van Amerongen MJ, Jenniskens SFM, van den Boezem PB, et al. Radiofrequency ablation compared to surgical resection for curative treatment of patients with colorectal liver metastases e a meta- analysis. HPB (Oxford). 2017;19(9):749-756.
68.	Shady W, Petre EN, Vakiani E, et al. Kras mutation is a marker of worse oncologic outcomes after percutaneous radiofrequency ablation of colorectal liver metastases. Oncotarget. 2017;8(39):66117-66127.
69.	Elias D, De Baere T, Smayra T, et al. Percutaneous radiofrequency thermoablation as an alternative to surgery for treatment of liver
 
tumour recurrence after hepatectomy. Br J Surg. 2002;89(6):752- 756.
70.	Sofocleous CT, Petre EN, Gonen M, et al. CT-guided radiofrequency ablation as a salvage treatment of colorectal cancer hepatic metas- tases developing after hepatectomy. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2011;22(6): 755-761.
71.	Gu Y, Huang Z, Gu H, et al. Does the site of the primary affect out- comes when ablating colorectal liver metastases with radiofrequency ablation? Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2018;41(6):912-919.
72.	Gillams A, Khan Z, Osborn P, et al. Survival after radiofrequency ablation in 122 patients with inoperable colorectal lung metastases. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2012;36(3):724-730.
73.	Kurilova I, Gonzalez-Aguirre A, Beets-Tan RG, et al. Microwave abla- tion in the management of colorectal cancer pulmonary metastases. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2018;41(10):1530-1544.
74.	Najafi A, de Baere T, Purenne E, et al. Risk factors for local tumour progression after RFA of pulmonary metastases: a matched case- control study. Eur Radiol. 2021;31(7):5361-5369.
75.	Kashima M, Yamakado K, Takaki H, et al. Complications after 1000 lung radiofrequency ablation sessions in 420 patients: a single cen- ter’s experiences. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2011;197(4):W576-W580.
76.	Schlijper RCJ, Grutters JPC, Houben R, et al. What to choose as radical local treatment for lung metastases from colo-rectal cancer: surgery or radiofrequency ablation? Cancer Treat Rev. 2014;40(1):60-67.
77.	Ahmed KA, Caudell JJ, El-Haddad G, et al. Radiosensitivity differences between liver metastases based on primary histology suggest impli- cations for clinical outcomes after stereotactic body radiation ther- apy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;95(5):1399-1404.
78.	Binkley MS, Trakul N, Jacobs LR, et al. Colorectal histology is associ- ated with an increased risk of local failure in lung metastases treated with stereotactic ablative radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015;92(5):1044-1052.
79.	Oh D, Ahn YC, Seo JM, et al. Potentially curative stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for single or oligometastasis to the lung. Acta Oncol. 2012;51(5):596-602.
80.	Fiorentini G, Aliberti C, Tilli M, et al. Intra-arterial infusion of irinotecan-loaded drug-eluting beads (DEBIRI) versus intravenous therapy (FOLFIRI) for hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer: final results of a phase III study. Anticancer Res. 2012;32(4):1387-1395.
81.	Martin RCG, Scoggins CR, Schreeder M, et al. Randomised controlled trial of irinotecan drug-eluting beads with simultaneous FOLFOX and bevacizumab for patients with unresectable colorectal liver-limited metastasis. Cancer. 2015;121(20):3649-3658.
82.	Jones RP, Malik HZ, Fenwick SW, et al. PARAGON II e a single arm multicentre phase II study of neoadjuvant therapy using irinotecan bead in patients with resectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2016;42(12):1866-1872.
83.	Akinwande O, Dendy M, Ludwig JM, et al. Hepatic intra-arterial in- jection of irinotecan drug eluting beads (DEBIRI) for patients with unresectable colorectal liver metastases: a systematic review. Surg Oncol. 2017;26(3):268-275.
84.	Fiorentini G, Carandina R, Sarti D, et al. Polyethylene glycol microspheres loaded with irinotecan for arterially directed embolic therapy of meta- static liver cancer. World J Gastrointest Oncol. 2017;9(9):379-384.
85.	Prince JF, van den Bosch MAAJ, Nijsen JFW, et al. Efficacy of radio- embolisation with 166Ho-microspheres in salvage patients with liver metastases: a phase 2 study. J Nucl Med. 2017;59(4):582-588.
86.	Smits MLJ, Nijsen JFW, van den Bosch MAAJ, et al. Holmium-166 radioembolisation in patients with unresectable, chemorefractory liver metastases (HEPAR trial): a phase 1, dose-escalation study. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(10):1025-1034.
87.	Hendlisz A, Eynde MVd, Peeters M, et al. Phase III trial comparing protracted intravenous ﬂuorouracil infusion alone or with yttrium-90 resin microspheres radioembolisation for liver-limited metastatic colorectal cancer refractory to standard chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(23):3687-3694.
88.	Wasan HS, Gibbs P, Sharma NK, et al. First-line selective internal radiotherapy plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone in pa- tients with liver metastases from colorectal cancer (FOXFIRE,
 

 
SIRFLOX, and FOXFIRE-Global): a combined analysis of three multi- centre, randomised, phase 3 trials. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(9):1159- 1171.
89.	van Hazel GA, Heinemann V, Sharma NK, et al. SIRFLOX: randomised phase III trial comparing first-line mFOLFOX6 (plus or minus bev- acizumab) versus mFOLFOX6 (plus or minus bevacizumab) plus se- lective internal radiation therapy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(15):1723-1731.
90.	Gibbs P, Heinemann V, Sharma NK, et al. Effect of primary tumour side on survival outcomes in untreated patients with metastatic colorectal cancer when selective internal radiation therapy is added to chemotherapy: combined analysis of two randomised controlled studies. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2018;17(4):e617-e629.
91.	Deschamps F, Elias D, Goere D, et al. Intra-arterial hepatic chemo- therapy: a comparison of percutaneous versus surgical implantation of port-catheters. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2010;34(5):973-979.
92.	Boige V, Malka D, Elias D, et al. Hepatic arterial infusion of oxaliplatin and intravenous LV5FU2 in unresectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer after systemic chemotherapy failure. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;15(1):219-226.
93.	Allard MA, Sebagh M, Baillie G, et al. Comparison of complete pathologic response and hepatic injuries between hepatic arterial infusion and systemic administration of oxaliplatin in patients with colorectal liver metastases. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014;22(6):1925-1932.
94.	Van Cutsem E, Cervantes A, Adam R, et al. ESMO consensus guide- lines for the management of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol. 2016;27(8):1386-1422.
95.	Papamichael D, Audisio RA, Glimelius B, et al. Treatment of colorectal cancer in older patients: International Society of Geriatric Oncology (SIOG) consensus recommendations 2013. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(3): 463-476.
96.	Papamichael D, Aapro M. Geriatric factors and outcomes in meta- static colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2017;74:96-97.
97.	Van Cutsem E, Cervantes A, Nordlinger B, et al. Metastatic colorectal cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2014;25:iii1-iii9.
98.	Schmoll HJ, Van Cutsem E, Stein A, et al. ESMO Consensus Guidelines for management of patients with colon and rectal cancer. A personalized approach to clinical decision making. Ann Oncol. 2012;23(10):2479-2516.
99.	Cassidy J, Clarke S, Díaz-Rubio E, et al. Randomised phase III study of capecitabine plus oxaliplatin compared with ﬂuorouracil/folinic acid plus oxaliplatin as first-line therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(12):2006-2012.
100.	Van Cutsem E, Hoff PM, Harper P, et al. Oral capecitabine vs intra- venous 5-ﬂuorouracil and leucovorin: integrated efficacy data and novel analyses from two large, randomised, phase III trials. Br J Cancer. 2004;90(6):1190-1197.
101.	Osterlund P, Kinos S, Pfeiffer P, et al. Continuation of ﬂuoropyrimidine treatment with S-1 after cardiotoxicity on capecitabine- or 5- ﬂuorouracil-based therapy in patients with solid tumours: a multi- centre retrospective observational cohort study. ESMO Open. 2022;7(3):100427.
102.	de Gramont A, Figer A, Seymour M, et al. Leucovorin and ﬂuorouracil with or without oxaliplatin as first-line treatment in advanced colo- rectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18(16):2938-2947.
103.	Douillard JY, Cunningham D, Roth AD, et al. Irinotecan combined with ﬂuorouracil compared with ﬂuorouracil alone as first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer: a multicentre randomised trial. Lancet. 2000;355(9209):1041-1047.
104.	Fuchs CS, Marshall J, Mitchell E, et al. Randomised, controlled trial of irinotecan plus infusional, bolus, or oral ﬂuoropyrimidines in first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer: results from the BICC-C study. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(30):4779-4786.
105.	Schmiegel W, Reinacher-Schick A, Arnold D, et al. Capecitabine/iri- notecan or capecitabine/oxaliplatin in combination with bevacizumab is effective and safe as first-line therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomised phase II study of the AIO colorectal study group. Ann Oncol. 2013;24(6):1580-1587.
106.	 
Seymour MT, Maughan TS, Ledermann JA, et al. Different strategies of sequential and combination chemotherapy for patients with poor prognosis advanced colorectal cancer (MRC FOCUS): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370(9582):143-152.
107.	Koopman M, Antonini NF, Douma J, et al. Sequential versus combi- nation chemotherapy with capecitabine, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin in advanced colorectal cancer (CAIRO): a phase III randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370(9582):135-142.
108.	Grothey A, Sargent D, Goldberg RM, et al. Survival of patients with advanced colorectal cancer improves with the availability of ﬂuorouracil-leucovorin, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin in the course of treatment. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22(7):1209-1214.
109.	Van Cutsem E, Peeters M, Siena S, et al. Open-label phase III trial of panitumumab plus best supportive care compared with best sup- portive care alone in patients with chemotherapy-refractory meta- static colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(13):1658-1664.
110.	Jonker DJ, O’Callaghan CJ, Karapetis CS, et al. Cetuximab for the treatment of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(20):2040-2048.
111.	Lacouture ME, Sibaud V, Gerber PA, et al. Prevention and manage- ment of dermatological toxicities related to anticancer agents: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. Ann Oncol. 2021;32(2):157-170.
112.	Douillard JY, Oliner KS, Siena S, et al. Panitumumab-FOLFOX4 treat- ment and RAS mutations in colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(11):1023-1034.
113.	Bokemeyer C, Köhne CH, Ciardiello F, et al. FOLFOX4 plus cetuximab treatment and RAS mutations in colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2015;51(10):1243-1252.
114.	Van Cutsem E, Köhne C-H, Hitre E, et al. Cetuximab and chemo- therapy as initial treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(14):1408-1417.
115.	Van Cutsem E, Lenz H-J, Köhne C-H, et al. Fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan plus cetuximab treatment and RAS mutations in colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(7):692-700.
116.	Douillard JY, Siena S, Cassidy J, et al. Final results from PRIME: randomised phase III study of panitumumab with FOLFOX4 for first- line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol. 2014;25(7):1346-1355.
117.	Qin S, Li J, Wang L, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of first-line cetux- imab plus leucovorin, ﬂuorouracil, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX-4) versus FOLFOX-4 in patients with RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: the open-label, randomised, phase III TAILOR trial. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(30):3031-3039.
118.	Maughan TS, Adams RA, Smith CG, et al. Addition of cetuximab to oxaliplatin-based first-line combination chemotherapy for treatment of advanced colorectal cancer: results of the randomised phase 3 MRC COIN trial. Lancet. 2011;377(9783):2103-2114.
119.	Guren TK, Thomsen M, Kure EH, et al. Cetuximab in treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer: final survival analyses and extended RAS data from the NORDIC-VII study. Br J Cancer. 2017;116(10):1271- 1278.
120.	Pietrantonio F, Cremolini C, Aprile G, et al. Single-agent panitumumab in frail elderly patients with advanced RAS and BRAF wild-type colorectal cancer: challenging drug label to light up new hope. Oncologist. 2015;20(11):1261-1265.
121.	Tebbutt NC, Wilson K, Gebski VJ, et al. Capecitabine, bevacizumab, and mitomycin in first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer: results of the Australasian gastrointestinal trials group randomised phase III MAX study. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(19):3191-3198.
122.	Cunningham D, Lang I, Marcuello E, et al. Bevacizumab plus capeci- tabine versus capecitabine alone in elderly patients with previously untreated metastatic colorectal cancer (AVEX): an open-label, rand- omised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(11):1077-1085.
123.	Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, et al. Bevacizumab plus iri- notecan, ﬂuorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(23):2335-2342.
124.	Saltz LB, Clarke S, Díaz-Rubio E, et al. Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy as first-line therapy in meta- static colorectal cancer: a randomized phase III study. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(12):2013-2019.
 

 
125.	Yamada Y, Denda T, Gamoh M, et al. S-1 and irinotecan plus bev- acizumab versus mFOLFOX6 or CapeOX plus bevacizumab as first-line treatment in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (TRICOLORE): a randomised, open-label, phase III, noninferiority trial. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(3):624-631.
126.	Denda T, Takashima A, Gamoh M, et al. Combination therapy of bevacizumab with either S-1 and irinotecan or mFOLFOX6/CapeOX as first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer (TRICOLORE): exploratory analysis of RAS status and primary tumour location in a randomised, open-label, phase III, non-inferiority trial. Eur J Cancer. 2021;154:296-306.
127.	Tejpar S, Stintzing S, Ciardiello F, et al. Prognostic and predictive relevance of primary tumour location in patients with RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: retrospective analyses of the CRYSTAL and FIRE-3 trials. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3(2):194-201.
128.	Venook AP, Niedzwiecki D, Innocenti F, et al. Impact of primary (1o) tumour location on overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) in patients (pts) with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC): analysis of CALGB/SWOG 80405 (Alliance). J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(15_suppl):3504.
129.	Rivera F, Karthaus M, Hecht JR, et al. Final analysis of the randomised PEAK trial: overall survival and tumour responses during first-line treatment with mFOLFOX6 plus either panitumumab or bev- acizumab in patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2017;32(8):1179-1190.
130.	Yoshino T, Uetake H, Tsuchihara K, et al. PARADIGM study: a multi- center, randomised, phase III study of mFOLFOX6 plus panitumumab or bevacizumab as first-line treatment in patients with RAS (KRAS/ NRAS) wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(3_suppl):85.
131.	Tol J, Koopman M, Cats A, et al. Chemotherapy, bevacizumab, and cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(6): 563-572.
132.	Souglakos J, Androulakis N, Syrigos K, et al. FOLFOXIRI (folinic acid, 5- ﬂuorouracil, oxaliplatin and irinotecan) vs FOLFIRI (folinic acid, 5- ﬂuorouracil and irinotecan) as first-line treatment in metastatic colorectal cancer (MCC): a multicentre randomised phase III trial from the Hellenic Oncology Research Group (HORG). Br J Cancer. 2006;94(6):798-805.
133.	Cremolini C, Loupakis F, Antoniotti C, et al. FOLFOXIRI plus bev- acizumab versus FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab as first-line treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer: updated overall survival and molecular subgroup analyses of the open-label, phase 3 TRIBE study. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(13):1306-1315.
134.	Cremolini C, Antoniotti C, Rossini D, et al. Upfront FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab and reintroduction after progression versus mFOLFOX6 plus bevacizumab followed by FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab in the treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (TRIBE2): a multicentre, open-label, phase 3, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(4):497-507.
135.	Rossini D, Antoniotti C, Lonardi S, et al. Upfront modified ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan plus panitumumab versus ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin plus panitumumab for pa- tients with RAS/BRAF wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: the phase III TRIPLETE study by GONO. J Clin Oncol. 2022:JCO2200839. https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.22.00839.
136.	Modest DP, Martens UM, Riera-Knorrenschild J, et al. FOLFOXIRI plus panitumumab as first-line treatment of RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: the randomised, open-label, phase II VOLFI study (AIO KRK0109). J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(35):3401-3411.
137.	Le DT, Durham JN, Smith KN, et al. Mismatch repair deficiency pre- dicts response of solid tumours to PD-1 blockade. Science. 2017;357(6349):409-413.
138.	Overman MJ, McDermott R, Leach JL, et al. Nivolumab in patients with metastatic DNA mismatch repair-deficient or microsatellite instability-high colorectal cancer (CheckMate 142): an open-label, multicentre, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(9):1182-1191.
139.	Diaz LA, Jr, Shiu KK, Kim TW, et al. Pembrolizumab versus chemo- therapy for microsatellite instability-high or mismatch repair-deficient
 
metastatic colorectal cancer (KEYNOTE-177): final analysis of a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol. 2022;23(5):659- 670.
140.	Chibaudel B, Maindrault-Goebel F, Lledo G, et al. Can chemotherapy be discontinued in unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer? The GERCOR OPTIMOX2 study. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(34):5727-5733.
141.	Koeberle D, Betticher DC, von Moos R, et al. Bevacizumab continu- ation versus no continuation after first-line chemotherapy plus bev- acizumab in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomised phase III non-inferiority trial (SAKK 41/06). Ann Oncol. 2015;26(4): 709-714.
142.	Aparicio T, Ghiringhelli F, Boige V, et al. Bevacizumab maintenance versus no maintenance during chemotherapy-free intervals in meta- static colorectal cancer: a randomised phase III trial (PRODIGE 9). J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(7):674-681.
143.	Simkens LHJ, van Tinteren H, May A, et al. Maintenance treatment with capecitabine and bevacizumab in metastatic colorectal cancer (CAIRO3): a phase 3 randomised controlled trial of the Dutch Colo- rectal Cancer Group. Lancet. 2015;385(9980):1843-1852.
144.	Hegewisch-Becker S, Graeven U, Lerchenmüller CA, et al. Mainte- nance strategies after first-line oxaliplatin plus ﬂuoropyrimidine plus bevacizumab for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (AIO 0207): a randomised, non-inferiority, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(13):1355-1369.
145.	Pietrantonio F, Morano F, Corallo S, et al. Maintenance therapy with panitumumab alone vs panitumumab plus ﬂuorouracil- leucovorin in patients with RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: a phase 2 randomised clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2019;5(9): 1268-1275.
146.	Modest DP, Karthaus M, Fruehauf S, et al. Panitumumab plus ﬂuo- rouracil and folinic acid versus ﬂuorouracil and folinic acid alone as maintenance therapy in RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: the randomised PANAMA trial (AIO KRK 0212). J Clin Oncol. 2022;40(1):72-82.
147.	Sobrero AF, Maurel J, Fehrenbacher L, et al. EPIC: phase III trial of cetuximab plus irinotecan after ﬂuoropyrimidine and oxaliplatin fail- ure in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(14):2311-2319.
148.	Peeters M, Oliner KS, Price TJ, et al. Analysis of KRAS/NRAS mutations in a phase III study of panitumumab with FOLFIRI compared with FOLFIRI alone as second-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;21(24):5469-5479.
149.	Giantonio BJ, Catalano PJ, Meropol NJ, et al. Bevacizumab in com- bination with oxaliplatin, ﬂuorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFOX4) for previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer: results from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Study E3200. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(12):1539-1544.
150.	Bennouna J, Sastre J, Arnold D, et al. Continuation of bevacizumab after first progression in metastatic colorectal cancer (ML18147): a randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(1):29-37.
151.	Van Cutsem E, Tabernero J, Lakomy R, et al. Addition of aﬂibercept to ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan improves survival in a phase III randomised trial in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer previ- ously treated with an oxaliplatin-based regimen. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(28):3499-3506.
152.	Tabernero J, Yoshino T, Cohn AL, et al. Ramucirumab versus placebo in combination with second-line FOLFIRI in patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma that progressed during or after first-line therapy with bevacizumab, oxaliplatin, and a ﬂuoropyrimidine (RAISE): a randomised, double-blind, multicentre, phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(5):499-508.
153.	Yervoy Summary of Product Characteristics. Bristol-Myers Squibb. Avail- able at https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-informati on/yervoy-epar-product-information_en.pdf. Accessed August 2, 2022.
154.	Corcoran RB, Atreya CE, Falchook GS, et al. Combined BRAF and MEK inhibition with dabrafenib and trametinib in BRAF V600-mutant colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(34):4023-4031.
155.	Hong DS, Morris VK, Fu S, et al. Phase 1B study of vemurafenib in combination with irinotecan and cetuximab in patients with BRAF-
 

 
mutated advanced cancers and metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(15_suppl). 3516-3516.
156.	Tabernero J, Grothey A, Van Cutsem E, et al. Encorafenib plus cetuximab as a new standard of care for previously treated BRAF V600E-mutant metastatic colorectal cancer: updated survival results and subgroup analyses from the BEACON study. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(4):273-284.
157.	Cunningham D, Humblet Y, Siena S, et al. Cetuximab monotherapy and cetuximab plus irinotecan in irinotecan-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(4):337-345.
158.	Cremolini C, Rossini D, Dell’Aquila E, et al. Rechallenge for patients with RAS and BRAF wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer with acquired resistance to first-line cetuximab and iri- notecan: a phase 2 single-arm clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2019;5(3):343-350.
159.	Martinelli E, Martini G, Famiglietti V, et al. Cetuximab rechallenge plus avelumab in pretreated patients with RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: the phase 2 single-arm clinical CAVE trial. JAMA Oncol. 2021;7(10):1529-1535.
160.	Grothey A, Cutsem EV, Sobrero A, et al. Regorafenib monotherapy for previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer (CORRECT): an inter- national, multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2013;381(9863):303-312.
161.	 
Li J, Qin S, Xu R, et al. Regorafenib plus best supportive care versus pla- cebo plus best supportive care in Asian patients with previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer (CONCUR): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(6):619-629.
162.	Mayer RJ, Van Cutsem E, Falcone A, et al. Randomised trial of TAS-102 for refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(20):1909-1919.
163.	Xu J, Kim TW, Shen L, et al. Results of a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III trial of triﬂuridine/tipiracil (TAS-102) monotherapy in Asian patients with previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer: the TERRA study. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(4):350-358.
164.	Mateo J, Chakravarty D, Dienstmann R, et al. A framework to rank genomic alterations as targets for cancer precision medicine: the ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets (ESCAT). Ann Oncol. 2018;29(9):1895-1902.
165.	Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J, et al. ESMO-magnitude of clinical benefit scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(10):2340-2366.
166.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144.
167.	Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18(3):421.
