




 SPECIAL ARTICLE	

Multiple myeloma: EHA-ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-upy
M. A. Dimopoulos1, P. Moreau2, E. Terpos1, M. V. Mateos3, S. Zweegman4, G. Cook5, M. Delforge6, R. Hájek7,
F. Schjesvold8,9, M. Cavo10, H. Goldschmidt11, T. Facon12, H. Einsele13, M. Boccadoro14, J. San-Miguel15, P. Sonneveld16 &
U. Mey17, on behalf of the EHA Guidelines Committee* and ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Clinical Therapeutics, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece; 2Department of Hematology, University Hospital Hôtel-Dieu, Nantes, France; 3University Hospital of Salamanca, IBSAL, Cancer Research Center, Salamanca, Spain; 4Department of Hematology, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 5Leeds Cancer Centre and University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; 6Department of Hematology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 7Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic; 8Oslo Myeloma Center, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo; 9KG Jebsen Center for B Cell Malignancies, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; 10Seràgnoli Institute of Hematology, Bologna University School of Medicine, Bologna, Italy; 11University Hospital Heidelberg, Internal Medicine V and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg, Germany; 12Hôpital Claude Huriez, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France; 13Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany; 14Division of Hematology, University of Torino, AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Torino, Italy; 15Clinica Universidad de Navarra, CIMA, IDISNA, CIBERONC, Pamplona, Spain; 16Erasmus Medical Center Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 17Department of Oncology and Hematology, Kantonsspital Graubünden, Chur, Switzerland

Available online 3 February 2021



 
INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell neoplasm that ac- counts for 1%-1.8% of all cancers and is the second most common haematological malignancy with an estimated inci- dence in Europe of 4.5-6.0/100 000/year. Despite the signifi- cant improvement in patients’ survival over the past 20 years, only 10%-15% of patients achieve or exceed expected survival compared with the matched general population.1

DIAGNOSIS AND STAGING
In 2017, ESMO published clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis, staging and definitions of progressive disease, relapse and refractoriness to therapy, which have not changed and are summarised in Supplementary Tables S1-S3, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014.2 The recommendations for the tests that are required for the diagnosis, determination of prognosis and follow-up of
MM are described in Table 1.

*Correspondence to: EHA EXecutive Ofﬁce/EHA Guidelines Committee - Koninginnegracht 12b, 2514 AA The Hague, Netherlands
E-mail: guidelines@ehaweb.org (EHA Guidelines Committee).
*ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
yThese Guidelines were developed by the European Hematology Association (EHA) and European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO). The two societies
nominated authors to write the guidelines as well as reviewers to comment on them. These guidelines were approved by the EHA Board and the ESMO Guidelines Committee in November 2020.
0923-7534/© 2021 The Author(s). published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of European Society for Medical Oncology and published by Wolters Kluwer Health Inc. on behalf of European Hematology Association. All rights reserved.
 
Response criteria to anti-myeloma therapy
One of the most significant improvements in the response criteria is the introduction of minimal residual disease (MRD) both in the bone marrow (BM) [using either next-generation sequencing or next-generation ﬂow cytometry (NGF)] and outside the BM [using positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT); imaging MRD].3 MRD negativity in the BM in patients who have achieved conventional complete response (CR) consistently correlates with prolonged progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) in both newly diagnosed MM (NDMM) and relapsed/refractory MM (RRMM) patients.4,5
MRD negativity in the BM, defined as the absence of tumour plasma cells within 1 000 000 BM cells (<10—6) shows the best results for the prediction of both PFS and OS compared with higher cut-off values (i.e. 10—5).4 Outside the BM, PET-CT is able to recognise hypermetabolic areas in approximately 15%-20% of patients with MRD negativity in the BM and is considered the best method for imaging MRD to date.6
MRD has been found to be a surrogate endpoint for PFS in patients receiving first-line treatment.7 Therefore, MRD may be used as an endpoint to accelerate drug develop- ment. The use of MRD to drive treatment decisions is under investigation, e.g. whether maintenance/continuous ther- apy in MRD-negative patients can be stopped or whether treatment needs to be changed in MRD-positive patients, especially in high-risk MM. The results of several phase III trials in the field will clarify the role of MRD in making decisions about therapy in MM.
 

Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	309
 
Annals of Oncology	M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Table 1. Recommendations on examinations at diagnosis, response assessment, during follow-up and at relapse of MM
Tool	Diagnosis	At response	At follow-up	At relapse
Blood	Blood count and blood smear
Serum electrophoresis and IF
Serum-free light chain

Serum immunoglobulin levels
Renal and liver function tests
Calcium
Lactate dehydrogenase Albumin, b2m
Flow cytometry	Obligatory Obligatory Obligatory Obligatory Obligatory
Obligatory Obligatory Obligatory
Optional	Obligatory

Obligatory (IF for CR confirmation) Obligatory to confirm sCR Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory Obligatory Not required
Not required	Obligatory

Obligatory (IF for CR patients) Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory Obligatory Optional
Not required	Obligatory Obligatory Obligatory Obligatory Obligatory
Obligatory Obligatory Obligatory
Optional
Urine	Urine sample from 24 h	Obligatory	Obligatory	Obligatory	Obligatory
	urine collection to check				
	for proteinuria and				
	light-chain proteinuria				
	Urine electrophoresis	Obligatory	Obligatory (IF for	Obligatory (IF for	Obligatory
	and IF electrophoresis		CR confirmation)	CR patients)	
Bone marrow	BM cytology and biopsy	Obligatory	Obligatory to confirm	Not required	Optional (obligatory
	to confirm plasmacytosis		CR or for non-secretory		for non-secretory
	and monoclonality		MM		disease)
	NGF or NGS to detect	Obligatory	Obligatory to confirm	Every 12 months in	Optional
	clonal plasma cells		MRD negativity in	CR and/or	
			CR or sCR patients	MRD-negative	
				patientsa

	Cytogenetics: karyotype	Obligatory	Not required	Not required	Obligatory for
	and FISH for detection				del17p, ampl 1q/
	of del17p, t(4;14),				gain 1q and t(11;14)
	t(14;16), ampl				
	1q/ gain 1q, t(11;14)				
	Advanced techniques:	For clinical trials	For clinical trials	For clinical trials	For clinical trials
	GEP, NGS	use only	use only	use only	use only
Imaging	WBLD-CT	Obligatory	Not required	When symptomatic	Obligatory
				(or CT of the	
				symptomatic area)	
	PET-CT	Optional (it may be	Obligatory to confirm	Every 12 months in	Optional
		carried out instead	imaging MRD	bone marrow	
		of WBLD-CT if available)		MRD-negative	
				patientsb

	Whole-body MRI	Obligatory in	Not required	When symptomatic	Optional
		WBLD-CT-negative			
		cases and if PET-CT is			
		not carried out			
ASCT, autologous stem cell transplantation; b2m, beta-2 microglobulin; BM, bone marrow; CR, complete response; CT, computed tomography; FISH, ﬂuorescent in situ hybridisation; GEP, gene expression profiling; IF, immunofixation; IMWG, International Myeloma Working Group; MM, multiple myeloma; MRD, minimal residual disease; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NGF, next-generation ﬂow cytometry; NGS, next-generation sequencing; PET, positron emission tomography; PFS, progression-free survival; sCR, stringent complete response; WBLD-CT, whole-body low-dose computed tomography.
a Sustained MRD negativity is supported by IMWG guidelines,3 although it is not fully reimbursed in several countries. In a recent ‘Real-World’ study, MRD assessments were carried out in 139 patients before starting lenalidomide maintenance after ASCT and/or at the achievement of CR, while additional assessments were subsequently carried out on an annual basis until sustained MRD negativity was confirmed. In total, 34.3% of patients who were MRD-positive after induction treatment achieved MRD-negative status during maintenance and ultimately had improved PFS. Sequential MRD assessments identified patients with progressively decreasing MRD levels who also had better PFS outcomes, compared with patients not showing a decreasing pattern of MRD.90
b Recommended based on panel consensus in order to confirm extramedullary MRD negativity in patients who are MRD-negative in the bone marrow. Adapted with permission from Caers et al.85
 


 

FRONT-LINE THERAPY
Smouldering MM
Patients with standard- or intermediate-risk smouldering MM (SMM; see Supplementary Table S4, available at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014) do not need immediate therapy. Myeloma treatment should be initiated according to the International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) recom- mendations.8 Regarding high-risk SMM, which is recently defined by the ‘20-20-20’ rule (Supplementary Table S4,
 

available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014),9 two randomised, phase III studies have shown that lenali- domide plays a significant role in prolonging PFS. In the first study, 119 patients with high-risk SMM (before the intro- duction of the new criteria for the definition of myeloma)8 were randomly assigned either to receive treatment with the combination of lenalidomide plus dexamethasone (Rd) for 9 cycles followed by lenalidomide maintenance or to observation. At a median follow-up of 75 months, Rd improved both PFS [median PFS (mPFS) not reached versus
 

310	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021
 
M. A. Dimopoulos et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
23 months; P < 0.0001] and OS compared with observation [hazard ratio (HR) 0.43; P 0.024].10,11 However, this study was conducted several years ago and enrolled a number of patients who are considered as having MM according to the revised definition. In the second study,12 182 patients with
intermediate- or high-risk SMM were randomly assigned either to receive lenalidomide monotherapy or to observa- tion. At a median follow-up of 35 months, PFS was longer with lenalidomide (HR 0.28; P 0.002); this result was driven mainly by the high-risk SMM group.12 This study has not reported OS advantage for the lenalidomide arm to date. Several phase II studies using daratumumab (Dara) mono- therapy,13 isatuximab (Isa) monotherapy or other Rd-based regimens [with elotuzumab (EloRd), or with ixazomib] have shown encouraging results.
All the above data suggest that high-risk SMM patients should be encouraged to participate in randomised phase III trials to reveal the best treatment that offers OS advantage. To date, no treatment has been approved for SMM.

Newly diagnosed patients who are eligible for high-dose therapy and autologous transplantation
For fit NDMM patients, aged <70 years, without comor- bidities, induction followed by high-dose therapy (HDT) with autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) and lenalido- mide maintenance is the recommended treatment. Two recent phase III trials comparing the use or not of upfront
ASCT, after triplet novel agent-based induction, showed that PFS was improved in the upfront ASCT arm.14-16 The first study was conducted by the French Myeloma Study Group and included 700 patients who were randomised to receive induction therapy with 3 cycles of bortezomib, lenalidomide and dexamethasone (VRd) and then consolidation therapy with either 5 additional cycles of VRd or high-dose melphalan (HDM) plus ASCT followed by 2 additional cy- cles of VRd. Patients in both groups received maintenance therapy with lenalidomide for 1 year. After a median follow- up of 44 months in the VRd-alone group and 43 months in the ASCT group, the mPFS was longer in the ASCT group (50
versus 36 months; P < 0.001). This benefit was observed across all patient subgroups, including advanced Revised
International Staging System (R-ISS) and high-risk cytoge- netics. OS at 4 years was not different between the ASCT and the non-ASCT groups.15
The second study was conducted by the European Myeloma Network (EMN)dEMN02/HO95 trialdand included 1503 patients who received an induction therapy with 3-4 cycles of bortezomib, cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone (VCD) followed by the first randomisation between bortezomib, melphalan and prednisone (VMP) versus ASCT. A second randomisation to consolidation ther- apy (2 cycles of VRd) versus no consolidation was carried out after intensification therapy, to be followed by lenalidomide maintenance until progression or toxicity in both arms. With a median follow-up from the first randomisation of 60.3
months, the mPFS was improved with ASCT compared with VMP (56.7 versus 41.9 months; P ¼ 0.0001).16
 
Induction regimen. A three-drug combination, including at least bortezomib and dexamethasone, has been the stan- dard of care.2,17 Bortezomib, thalidomide, dexamethasone (VTD) induction showed better response rates over VCD at the expense of a higher rate of peripheral neuropathy.18 VCD and bortezomib, doxorubicin and dexamethasone (PAd) were equally effective in terms of response but VCD was less toxic.19 In single-arm studies, VRd produced high very good partial response (VGPR), CR and MRD negativity rates, as well as prolonged PFS.4,15,20-22 However, there is no direct comparison between VTD with VRd induction before ASCT. There is only an integrated analysis of three randomised trials, presented in abstract form, which showed that VRd produces higher VGPR and MRD nega- tivity rates compared with VTD.23
The introduction of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), and especially of Dara, in the front-line setting has changed the treatment landscape in MM. In the phase III CASSIOPEIA trial, 4 cycles of induction with VTD (n	542) were compared with 4 cycles of VTD plus Dara (DaraVTD) (n 543); patients then received a single ASCT followed by consolidation and maintenance.24 PFS at 18 months showed the superiority of DaraVTD over VTD (93% versus 85%, P < 0.0001).25 The combination of Dara with VRd (DaraVRd) had
better results. In the randomised phase II GRIFFIN study, 207 patients were randomly assigned to receive VRd Dara induction   (4   cycles),   ASCT, VRd       Dara consolidation (2 cycles) and lenalidomide Dara maintenance (26 cycles). The 24-month PFS rates were 95.8% for DaraVRd and 89.8% for VRd.21
The substitution of bortezomib with the second- generation proteasome inhibitor (PI) carfilzomib (K) resul- ted in high sustained MRD negativity rate in carfilzomib, lenalidomide and dexamethasone (KRd) compared with VRd, especially in patients with advanced R-ISS.26 There is no direct comparison between VRd and KRd in NDMM patients who are eligible for ASCT; however, in the ENDURANCE trial (see Elderly patients’ section), which included <30% of patients who received an ASCT, there was
no PFS difference between the two regimens.
Based on the above data, VRd is likely to offer the best risk-benefit profile to date among triplet combinations [II, B]. The four-drug combination DaraVTD is more efficacious than VTD [I, A] but comparisons are lacking versus DaraVRd or VRd [these regimens have not been approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA)]. The EMA approval of DaraVTD makes it a new standard of care for induction before ASCT. Novel studies that are ongoing compare DaraVRd versus VRd, DaraVCD versus VTD, or combinations with novel mAbs such as IsaVRd, IsaKRd or EloVRd will reveal the best induction regimen in the future.

Conditioning regimen before ASCT. HDM (200 mg/m2) re- mains the standard conditioning regimen before ASCT for NDMM patients. The addition of busulfan to melphalan has not shown OS benefit over HDM.27,28 The addition of bortezomib to HDM did not improve the efficacy of the conditioning regimen and had higher toxicity.29
 
Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	311
 
Annals of Oncology	M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

 
Consolidation therapy. The EMN02/HO95 study showed that at a median follow-up of 42 months, consolidation therapy with 2 cycles of VRd improved mPFS compared with no consolidation (58.9 versus 45.5 months; P 0.014).16 It must be noted that induction treatment in this study included 4 cycles of VCD and not VRd or DaraVTD.
The use of a second planned ASCT as consolidation has also been tested in clinical trials. In the EMN02/HO95 study, in centres with a policy of double ASCT, patients were assigned to receive VMP, single ASCT (ASCT-1) or two planned ASCTs (administered 2-3 months apart; ASCT-2) to prospectively compare ASCT-1 with ASCT-2. Patients who received ASCT-2 had a prolonged PFS compared with those who received ASCT-1: the 3-year PFS probability was 53.5% for ASCT-2 versus 44.9% for ASCT-1 group (P 0.036), which represented a 26% reduced risk of progression or death in the ASCT-2 group. Importantly, ASCT-2 significantly improved the outcome of patients with high-risk cytoge- netics (mPFS: 46 and 26.7 months for ASCT-2 and ASCT-1, respectively; HR 0.59; P 0.062).14 In the same study, OS from the first randomisation was significantly prolonged with ASCT-2 compared with ASCT-1 (3-year rate: 89% versus 82%; HR 0.52; P 0.011); this benefit was also reported in patients with R-ISS II III (HR 0.48; P 0.013) and with high-risk cytogenetics (HR 0.52; P 0.042).14
The phase III StaMINA study randomised 758 patients who received induction therapy for up to 12 cycles, followed by one ASCT versus tandem ASCT versus ASCT-1 followed by 4 subsequent cycles of VRd; all treatment groups received lenalidomide maintenance until disease progression.30 The 6-year PFS in high-risk patients was 43.6% and 26% for tandem ASCT and ASCT-1, respectively (P 0.03).31
Finally, a study which compared tandem ASCTs with ASCT-1 followed by allogeneic SCT (allo-SCT) has recently reported the 10-year median follow-up results. In both standard-risk (n 625) and high-risk patients (n   85), there was no PFS or OS difference.32
Maintenance therapy. Treatment with lenalidomide main- tenance after ASCT offers PFS and OS benefits over placebo as reported in two large randomised trials.33,34 A meta- analysis including more than 1200 patients, with a median follow-up of 79.5 months, showed that lenalidomide maintenance offers more than 2 years of PFS benefit (52.8 versus 23.5 months) and 2.5 years of OS benefit over pla- cebo. In this study, there was no benefit in patients with ISS-III disease or high-risk cytogenetics.35 However, the Medical Research Council (MRC) myeloma-XI trial, in which 1137 patients were assigned to lenalidomide maintenance and 834 patients to observation, showed that, in high-risk patients, the 3-year OS was 75% in the lenalidomide group compared with 64% in the observation group, and in ultra-high-risk patients it was 63% versus 43.5%, respec- tively.36 These results should be taken with caution as the study was not powered to show differences in the two sub- populations and all patients who entered the maintenance phase were immunomodulatory drug (IMiD)-exposed and
-sensitive. Furthermore the definition of high-risk patients
 
was different in the meta-analysis and in the MRC-XI trial; in the meta-analysis, high-risk cytogenetics included only t(4;14) and del17p patients while in the MRC-XI trial pa- tients were classified into three cytogenetic risk groups: standard risk (no adverse cytogenetic abnormalities), high risk (one adverse cytogenetic abnormality) or ultra-high risk (two or more adverse cytogenetic abnormalities) [adverse cytogenetic abnormalities were defined as gain(1q), t(4;14), t(14;16), t(14;20), or del(17p)].35,36 The EMA has approved lenalidomide for maintenance therapy post-ASCT for all MM patients until progression.
Bortezomib maintenance showed PFS benefit compared with thalidomide maintenance in a randomised study, but the induction treatment was not the same between the two treatment groups [PAd versus vincristine, doxorubicin and dexamethasone (VAD), respectively].37 A recent double- blind, placebo-controlled, phase III trial (TOURMALINE- MM3) compared the oral PI ixazomib with placebo in 656 patients who received induction therapy plus HDM ASCT. There was a 28% reduction in the risk of progression or death with ixazomib (mPFS: 26.5 versus 21.3 months, respectively; P 0.0023). In the high-risk population, ixazomib also offered similar PFS advantage over placebo (HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.38-1.02).38 Bortezomib and ixazomib have not yet been approved by the EMA for maintenance after ASCT.

Elderly patients or patients with NDMM who are ‘not’
eligible to receive HDT and autologous transplantation
Before 2019, VMP and Rd were the standards of care for NDMM patients who were not eligible for an ASCT in Europe.39,40 A phase III trial comparing VRd with Rd in 525 NDMM patients (43% were younger than 65 years of age) was recently updated and showed the superiority of VRd regarding PFS (mPFS: 41 versus 29 months; P 0.003) and OS [median OS (mOS) not reached versus 69 months; P	0.0114].41 Based on these results, the EMA approved VRd in April 2019 for use in NDMM patients who are not eligible for ASCT. The substitution of bor- tezomib with K in the Rd combination seems not to offer better results. The ENDURANCE trial, which compared KRd versus VRd in NDMM patients without an immediate intent for ASCT, failed to show superiority of KRd regarding PFS in the study population (n	1087), which included a low number of patients with high-risk cytogenetics.42
The addition of Dara to VMP and Rd has created two new standards of care. DaraVMP and DaraRd were approved by the EMA in October 2019, based on the results of two large phase III studies. In the ALCYONE study, 706 patients with NDMM who were ineligible for ASCT were randomised to receive 9 cycles of VMP either alone or with Dara (DaraVMP); then Dara was given until disease progres- sion.43 At a median follow-up of 40 months, the mPFS was
36.4 versus 19.3 months for the DaraVMP and VMP arms, respectively, while the 36-month rate of OS was 78% and 68% for the two groups (HR 0.60; P ¼ 0.0003).44 In the
 

312	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021
 
M. A. Dimopoulos et al.	Annals of Oncology

Figure 1. Recommendations for MM front-line therapy.
ASCT, autologous stem cell transplantation; DaraRd, daratumumab/lenalidomide/dexamethasone; DaraVMP, daratumumab/bortezomib/melphalan/prednisone; DaraVTD, daratumumab/bortezomib/thalidomide/dexamethasone; MM, multiple myeloma; Rd, lenalidomide/dexamethasone; VCD, bortezomib/cyclophosphamide/ dexamethasone; VMP, bortezomib/melphalan/prednisone; VRd, bortezomib/lenalidomide/dexamethasone; VTD, bortezomib/thalidomide/dexamethasone.

 
MAIA study, 737 NDMM patients who were ineligible for ASCT were randomised to receive either DaraRd or Rd until disease progression. At a median follow-up of 28 months, the estimated PFS at 30 months was 70.6% in the DaraRd group and 55.6% in the Rd group (HR 0.56; P < 0.001).45
Other approved regimens in this setting include bend-
amustine plus prednisone46 and melphalan, prednisone and lenalidomide (MPR),47 but they are not routinely used and cannot be considered as standards of care.
It is important to realise that one-third of patients are older than 75 years at diagnosis and at least 30% are frail. Please refer to Management of frail elderly patients in the Supplementary Material, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014, for consensus panel recom- mendations for the management of these patients.
Although maintenance is not standard for patients who are not eligible for ASCT (almost all approved regimens are
 
used continuously until progression or unacceptable toxicity), ixazomib maintenance was tested in a phase III study which included 706 patients who received 6-12 months of standard induction before being randomised to receive either ixazomib or placebo. Ixazomib maintenance offered a PFS benefit over placebo (17.4 versus 9.4 months, HR 0.65, P 0.00003).48 Figure 1 depicts the first-line options for the treatment of NDMM patients.


Recommendations
‘Watch-and-wait’ remains the recommended approach for SMM [II, B]. High-risk patients are encouraged to participate in randomised phase III studies that are pow- ered for OS advantage of the experimental treatment modality.
 

Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	313
 
Annals of Oncology	M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

 
For patients <70 years without comorbidities, induction therapy followed by HDM and ASCT is the recommended treatment [I, A].
●	Regarding induction therapy pre-ASCT, VRd is likely to
 
due to early disease progression. Multivariate landmark analyses from the time of ASCT showed superior PFS and OS (P 0.0087 and P 0.0057 respectively) in patients who received ASCT.50 The American and European Associations
 
offer the best risk-benefit profile to date among triplets
based on bortezomib [II, B]; however, VRd lacks direct comparisons with VTD or DaraVTD and is not licensed by the EMA. The four-drug combination DaraVTD is more efficacious than VTD [I, A] and is the new standard of care. If this is not available, VTD [I, A] or VCD [II, B] may be used. DaraVRd and IsaVRd are under clinical investigation and may be standards of care in the near future. Induction with 4-6 cycles is the recommended approach.
HDM (200 mg/m ) is the standard conditioning regimen before ASCT [I, A].
Consolidation therapy post-ASCT has not been estab- lished to date as standard therapy; 2 cycles of VRd consolidation has to be considered in patients who receive VCD induction [II, B], while a tandem ASCT is rec- ommended for patients with genetically defined high-risk disease [II, B] or in all patients who received VCD induction [II, B]. Allo-SCT following ASCT does not offer OS benefit even in high-risk disease compared with tandem ASCT.
Maintenance with lenalidomide is considered the stan- dard of care for all MM patients post-ASCT [I, A]; borte- zomib may be considered for patients with high-risk disease [II, B]. Ixazomib maintenance offers PFS benefit over placebo [I, A], but has not been approved by the EMA or the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
For patients who are not eligible for ASCT, there are three new standards of care: VRd, DaraVMP and DaraRd [I, A]. When DaraRd and DaraVMP are not avail- able, VRd is the preferred option in fit patients; Rd and VMP may be considered for patients who cannot receive the previous regimens [I, A].


TREATMENT OF RELAPSED/REFRACTORY PATIENTS
Patients who have received one prior line of therapy
Salvage ASCT may be an option for patients who have received front-line induction with bortezomib-based triplet combination followed by an ASCT. Two prospective studies of salvage ASCT have been published so far. The first included a bortezomib-based re-induction and a random- isation between salvage ASCT or cyclophosphamide, which is suboptimal for relapsed patients. Salvage ASCT signifi-
cantly extended mPFS (19 versus 11 months; P < 0.001) and OS (67 versus 52 months; P        0.0169).49 The second
included patients with first to third relapse who were randomised to a transplant arm (n 139) consisting of 3 Rd re-induction cycles, ASCT and lenalidomide maintenance (10 mg/day) or to a control arm (n 138) of continuous Rd. Although there was no difference regarding PFS and OS between the two arms, almost 30% of the patients in the transplant arm did not receive the assigned ASCT mainly
 
for Bone and Marrow Transplantation have reported that
HDT and ASCT should be considered appropriate treatment of any patient relapsing after primary therapy that includes an ASCT with initial remission duration of >18 months.51 However, this recommendation was made before the broad use of lenalidomide as maintenance therapy post- ASCT. Although there is no evidence for the role of salvage ASCT in patients who received lenalidomide main- tenance, the panel suggests that second-line ASCT is a logical approach for patients who relapse after primary
therapy that includes an ASCT followed by lenalidomide maintenance and had an initial remission duration of 36 months. The use of re-induction is a matter of debate as there is no prospective study on this issue. Retrospective studies suggest that the use of re-induction does not offer survival benefit in salvage ASCT.52
In patients in whom a salvage ASCT is not considered, the second-line therapy should include an Rd-based regimen,
i.e. KRd, DaraRd, ixazomib/lenalidomide/dexamethasone (IRd) or EloRd for patients who received a bortezomib- based therapy upfront without lenalidomide or Dara (i.e. VCD, VTD, VMP); all these combinations were found to be superior to Rd, in terms of PFS, in pivotal phase III studies.53-56 Based on both HR and absolute values of mPFS, DaraRd provides the longest PFS for patients with RRMM who have received 1-3 prior lines of therapy and have a standard-risk cytogenetic profile. KRd and EloRd have also shown OS benefit over Rd: mOS 48.3 versus 40.4 months for KRd versus Rd (HR 0.79; P     0.0045),57 and 48.3 versus
39.6 months for EloRd versus Rd,58 respectively. DaraRd is likely to have OS benefit over Rd, but mature data have not been presented, while IRd has no OS benefit over Rd. For relapsed patients with high-risk cytogenetics, although different cut-off values are used for the definition of del17p positivity, all above triplets have shown better results compared with Rd; however, the combination of a PI with Rd, i.e. KRd or IRd, along with DaraRd seem to offer the best benefit to date.
Elderly patients who received Rd upfront without Dara59 or patients who received lenalidomide maintenance after ASCT and are progressing (lenalidomide-refractory pa- tients), according to previous guidelines, could receive either K plus dexamethasone (Kd) or Dara and bortezomib plus dexamethasone (DaraVd) (patients treated with Kd or DaraVd had significantly improved PFS compared with Vd).60,61 Three phase III studies suggest that the combina- tion of pomalidomide with bortezomib and dexamethasone (PomVd) and the combinations of Dara or Isa with K and dexamethasone (DaraKd or IsaKd) are new options for this setting.60-62 In the first study, PomVd (n 278) was compared with Vd (n 270) in RRMM patients who had received 1-3 prior lines of therapy that included lenalido- mide. More than 70% of the patients were refractory to lenalidomide. After a median follow-up of 16 months,
 

314	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021
 
M. A. Dimopoulos et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
PomVd improved mPFS in the study population (11.2 versus
7.1 months; HR 0.61; P < 0.0001) as well as in patients refractory to lenalidomide (9.5 versus 5.6 months; P 0.0008) and in patients refractory to lenalidomide who received only 1 prior line of treatment (17.8 versus 9.5 months; P	0.03).62 PomVd was approved by the EMA in
May 2019.
In the second study (CANDOR), DaraKd was compared with Kd in RRMM patients who had received 1 prior line of therapy. This study showed that the mPFS was not reached for the DaraKd group and it was 15.8 months for the Kd group (HR 0.63; P     0.0014). DaraKd resulted in a better PFS benefit both among lenalidomide-exposed (HR 0.52) and lenalidomide-refractory patients (HR 0.45).63
Finally, in the third study, which was reported at the European Hematology Association (EHA) 2020 meeting, only 302 patients with RRMM and 1-3 prior lines of therapy were randomised to receive either IsaKd (n    179) or Kd (n 123). At a median follow-up of 20.7 months, mPFS was not reached for IsaKd whereas it was 19.1 months for Kd (HR 0.53; P 0.0007).64
Thus, PomVd, DaraKd and IsaKd are recommended therapies for patients who were previously exposed or are refractory to lenalidomide, while DaraKd or IsaKd can also be given in patients who are refractory to bortezomib.
The approval of Dara-based regimens (DaraVTD, DaraVMP and DaraRd) and of VRd, as first-line therapy for myeloma patients, makes the treatment of second and subsequent lines of therapy very challenging. Although there is some evidence that Dara retreatment can be efficacious in some patients,65,66 there are no data for Dara retreatment at second line.
Venetoclax is a selective Bcl-2 inhibitor that promotes MM cell apoptosis. The phase III BELLINI trial evaluated the com- bination of venetoclax with Vd (VenVd) compared with Vd among RRMM patients, who had received 1-3 prior lines of therapy and were PI-sensitive. A significant PFS benefit was reported with VenVd among patients with t(11;14) (HR 0.10; P    0.003) and those with high BCL2 expression (HR 0.26; P < 0.001) but no OS difference was shown in this population. On the contrary, Vd was superior to VenVd in terms of OS
among patients without t(11;14) and low BCL2 (HR 3.13; P 0.019).67 Therefore, VenVd is an option only for patients with t(11;14) or high BCL2 levels who have failed lenalidomide and are sensitive to PI. VenVd is awaiting EMA approval.
Selinexor is an oral, selective inhibitor of XPO1-mediated nuclear export, leading to the reactivation of tumour- suppressor proteins. Selinexor in combination with Vd (SVd) was compared with Vd in a phase III study with 402 patients with RRMM who received 1-3 prior lines of ther- apy. SVd significantly prolonged mPFS compared with Vd (13.9 versus 9.4 months, HR 0.70, P 0.0066), suggesting that SVd might be another option in patients who were treated with lenalidomide-based regimens upfront.68 SVd is awaiting EMA approval.
In Figure 2, the possible options for second-line therapy, taking into consideration the previous line and the
 
refractoriness to specific agents, are described. For Dara- previously exposed or -refractory patients, the recommen- dations are based on panel opinion as there is no evidence for the efficacy of the approved second-line regimens in these patients to date.

Patients who have received two or more prior lines of therapy
Treatment of RRMM patients who received two or more prior lines of therapy is becoming challenging.69 A recent study revealed that patients who are refractory to two PIs, two IMiDs and a CD38 mAb have an mOS of 5.6 months only.70 For patients who have been exposed or are re- fractory to both bortezomib and lenalidomide, who have not received an mAb, DaraKd or IsaKd are suitable options. The combinations of Elo or Isa with pomalidomide and dexamethasone (EloPd and IsaPd, respectively) are suitable options for patients who have failed 2 lines of previous therapies, including lenalidomide and a PI, based on the results of two studies. The first was a phase II study, in which patients were randomly assigned to receive either EloPd (n     60) or Pd (n      57). After a follow-up period of 9 months, the mPFS was 10.3 months in the EloPd group and 4.7 in the Pd group (HR 0.54; P 0.008).71 The second was a phase III study, in which patients were randomised to receive either IsaPd (n 154) or Pd (n 153). At a median follow-up of 11.6 months, mPFS was 11.5 months in the IsaPd group versus 6.5 months in the Pd group (HR 0.596; P     0.001).72 EloPd and IsaPd were recently approved by the EMA in this setting.
The combination of Dara with pomalidomide and dexa- methasone (DaraPd) has been approved by the FDA for patients who have failed 2 lines of previous therapies, including lenalidomide and a PI. This was based on a phase II non-randomised study where DaraPd was given in 103 patients with RRMM. At a median follow-up of 13 months, the mPFS was 8.8 months and the mOS was 17.5 months.73 DaraPd has not yet been approved by the EMA, as the re- sults of the phase III APOLLO study (DaraPd versus Pd) are pending.
Patients with t(11;14), who are refractory to lenalidomide and are PI-sensitive may be treated with VenVd, when this regimen is licensed, as previously discussed.
For triple-class refractory patients, selinexor- dexamethasone (Sd) or belantamab mafodotin mono- therapy may be suitable options. In a phase II study with 122 RRMM patients (median number of 7 prior lines of therapy), oral selinexor was given with dexamethasone twice weekly. An mPFS of 3.7 months and an mOS of 8.6 months were reported. Fatigue, nausea and decreased appetite were common and were typically grade 1 or 2 events; grade 3 events were noted in up to 25% of patients and no grade 4 events were reported.74
Belantamab mafodotin is an antibody-drug conjugate targeting B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA). In a phase II study, 196 patients with triple-class refractory MM received
 


Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	315
 
 
Figure 2. Second-line options for MM patients who received VRd and Dara-based front-line therapies.
The three different ﬂow-charts shown in this figure depict three different scenariosddepending on the first-line treatment given (from left to right):
second-line options after VRd first-line treatment
second-line options after DaraRd first-line treatment and
second-line options after DaraVMP or DaraVTD first-line treatment.
Dara, daratumumab; Elo, elotuzumab; Isa, isatuximab; Ixa, ixazomib; K, carfilzomib; Kd, carfilzomib/dexamethasone; MM, multiple myeloma; PomVd, pomalidomide/bortezomib/dexamethasone; Rd, lenalidomide/dexamethasone; S, selinexor; Vd, bortezomib/dexamethasone; VMP, bortezomib/melphalan/prednislone; VRd, bortezomib/lenalidomide/dexamethasone; Ven, venetoclax; VTD, bortezomib/thalidomide/dexamethasone.
a Patients with t(11;14).
b Patients who progress while on monthly Dara are considered as Dara-refractory.
c All recommendations for patients who receive front-line therapy with Dara-based therapies are based on panel consensus as there are no trials evaluating regimens in second-line therapy that include patients refractory or exposed
to Dara.
 
 
Figure 3. Recommendations for MM patients who receive a third or subsequent line of therapy.
Dara, daratumumab; Elo, elotuzumab; IMiD, immunomodulatory drug; Isa, isatuximab; Kd, carfilzomib/dexamethasone; mAb, monoclonal antibody; MM, multiple myeloma; PCd, pomalidomide/cyclophosphamide/dexamethasone; Pd, pomalidomide/dexamethasone; PI, proteasome inhibitor; S, selinexor; Sd, selinexor/dexamethasone; Vd, bortezomib/dexamethasone; Ven, venetoclax.
a Only phase IB data are published for DaraPd. Publication of phase III data are expected in 2021.
b For patients with t(11;14) or high BCL2 levels.
 
Annals of Oncology	M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

 

two different doses of belantamab mafodotin (2.5 and
3.4 mg/kg). The mPFS was 2.9 and 4.9 months for the two doses, respectively. The most common grade 3-4 adverse events included keratopathy (27% and 21% of patients for the two doses, respectively), thrombocytopaenia and anaemia.75 Melﬂufen may also be beneficial in Dara and pomalidomide-refractory patients but the results of the phase III trial have not yet been reported.76
Figure 3 summarises the recommendations for RRMM patients who receive third or subsequent lines of therapy. Immunotherapy strategies targeting BCMA or other an- tigens on the surface of myeloma cells, including bispecific T-cell engagers (BiTEs) and chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR-T) cells, are under clinical investigation in RRMM patients. Results for the first published study with a CAR-T cell product in myeloma patients showed that infusion of bb2121 in 33 consecutive patients with multi-refractory disease resulted in an objective response rate of 85%, including 15 patients (45%) with CR; all were MRD-negative. The mPFS was 11.8 months. CAR-T cell expansion was associated with better responses and CAR-T cells persisted up to 1 year after the infusion. A total of 25 patients (76%) had cytokine release syndrome, while neurological  toxic effects occurred in 14 patients (42%).77 Several studies using other CAR-T cell products or T-cell engagers (TCEs) were reported in the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and EHA 2020 meetings and had similar results, suggesting that these immunotherapy techniques may	increase	survival	of	myeloma	patients	(see Supplementary Material, available at https://doi.org/10.1 016/j.annonc.2020.11.014, section on novel immunother-
apies for myeloma).

Recommendations
Patients who receive second-line therapy

Second-line ASCT is an option for patients who received primary therapy that included an ASCT followed by lena- lidomide maintenance and had an initial remission dura- tion of ≥36 months (panel consensus).
 

Patients at third and subsequent lines of treatment

For patients who have been exposed or are refractory to both bortezomib and lenalidomide, DaraKd [I, A], IsaPd [I, A], IsaKd [I, A] and EloPd [II, B] are recommended. Patients with t(11;14), who are refractory to lenalido- mide and are PI-sensitive may be treated with VenVd [I, A], if available.
For triple-class refractory patients, Sd or belantamab mafodotin monotherapy is recommended [II, B], if avail- able. Results of phase III studies of melﬂufen, TCEs and CAR-Ts in triple-class refractory patients are awaited.

MANAGEMENT OF PLASMA CELL LEUKAEMIA
Primary plasma cell leukaemia (PPCL) is a rare and aggres- sive variant of MM, operationally defined by the presence of 20% and/or an absolute number >2 109/l of clonal plasma cells in the peripheral blood without a previous history of MM.78 The cut-off value of circulating plasma cells for the definition of PCL may be reduced to 5% in the near future, as the survival of these patients is similar to those with 20% of circulating plasma cells.74 PPCL should be distinguished from secondary PCL, which generally consti-
tutes the leukaemic evolution of a pre-existing, end-stage RRMM, and from extramedullary myeloma. Diagnostic work-up and staging procedures in PPCL are similar to those applied in MM. However, they have to be implemented by peripheral blood analysis for measuring circulating PC count and PET-CT for detecting possible extramedullary lesions.79 The outcome of patients with PCL remains poor and the mOS is around 1 year.78,79 There are no precise guidelines for the treatment of PPCL due to the lack of phase III trials in this setting. Only two prospective phase II studies have been published so far for PPCL.80,81 Overall, treatment should be immediate and possibly oriented toward borte- zomib and/or lenalidomide-based multiphase approaches in combination with chemotherapy agents, with short treatment-free intervals. It should ideally include induction, double ASCT, consolidation and maintenance [II, B]. KRd
82
 
●	Patients who had received a bortezomib-based therapy
 
may be another option for these patients	but more data
 
upfront without lenalidomide or Dara should receive an
Rd-based regimen, i.e. KRd, DaraRd, IRd or EloRd [I, A]. DaraRd provides the best PFS for these patients, while only KRd and EloRd showed an OS benefit over Rd to date. Patients who are refractory to lenalidomide upfront could receive either PomVD, DaraKd, IsaKd or DaraVd [I, A]. PomVd is the approved indication with best results, in terms of PFS, as second-line therapy in lenalidomide-refractory patients. DaraKd has given the best reported PFS to date in lenalidomide-refractory pa- tients, but DaraKd is awaiting EMA approval. Similarly, IsaKd and SVd, which are also suitable for this setting [I, A], have not yet been approved by the EMA.
VenVd is a suitable option for patients with t(11;14) who have failed lenalidomide and are sensitive to PIs [I, A], if available.
 
are needed before a recommendation can be made for PCL
patients.
Allo-SCT should be considered in selected cases [III, C]. In a recent study, 71 patients (median age 56 years) with PPCL underwent an allo-SCT and the 4-year outcomes were: non- relapse mortality 12%, PFS 19% and OS 31%.83 Thus, in patients younger than 50 years of age with a suitable donor, a myeloablative allo-SCT can be considered. Otherwise, a tandem transplant with an ASCT followed by a reduced- intensity conditioning allo-SCT if a related or an unrelated donor is available can be considered [IV, C].
Patients not eligible for transplant procedures should preferably receive continuous treatment [III, C]. In relapsed/ refractory PPCL, a switch to drugs not used at diagnosis should be considered, favouring combinations of lenalido- mide or pomalidomide plus dexamethasone with K or mAbs
 

318	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021
 
M. A. Dimopoulos et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
(Dara or Elo) (expert consensus). See Supplementary Table S6, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.202 0.11.014, for summary recommendations.

MANAGEMENT OF SOLITARY PLASMACYTOMA
Solitary plasmacytoma is an infrequent form of plasma cell neoplasm that presents as a single mass of monoclonal plasma cells, with either extramedullary or intraosseous location.84,85 Clonal PCs are typically absent in the BM aspirate by conventional morphology or immunohisto- chemistry and there are no other MM features (hyper- calcaemia, anaemia or renal disease attributable to MM).8 In some patients, a BM aspiration can detect a low mono- clonal plasma cell infiltration, which indicates a high risk of early progression to an overt myeloma disease.84,85 Furthermore, in a study following the use of high sensi- tivity ﬂow cytometry, half of the patients showed occult BM infiltration and half of these cases progressed at 2 years.86 Thus, detection of clonal PC using sensitive techniques in the BM is suggested [II, B] and systemic treatment of myeloma should be considered in these patients [III, B]. Before treatment initiation, whole-body magnetic reso- nance imaging (MRI) and PET-CT should be carried out to exclude the presence of multiple plasmacytomas, com- mending systemic treatment instead of radiotherapy (RT) [I, A].6,87 Local high-dose RT is the preferred treatment of choice [II, A], but about two-thirds of patients develop MM at 10 years’ follow-up.88 With current staging techniques,
i.e. NGF and PET-CT, the incidence of solitary plasmacytoma is expected to decrease and the cure rate to increase. See Supplementary Table S6, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014, for summary recommendations.

SUPPORTIVE CARE
Recommendations for the management of myeloma com- plications, i.e. bone disease, anaemia, BM failure, infections, vaccination strategies and renal impairment, are described in the Supplementary Material, available at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014, in the section on Sup- portive Care.

FOLLOW-UP AND LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS
Table 1 includes all tests that have to be carried out during follow-up of myeloma patients. Full blood count, serum and urine electrophoresis and serum-free light chain (sFLC) determination, creatinine and calcium tests should be carried out monthly or at least every 3 months. sFLC should be used to detect light chain escape. In cases of relapsed patients with no positivity for del17p or add1q at diagnosis, FISH analysis for del17p and add1q should be carried out to reveal high-risk relapse. In case of bone pain, whole-body low-dose CT (WBLD-CT), MRI or PET-CT should be carried out to detect new bone lesions.85
MM has for a long time been considered as an incurable disease. Recent trials incorporating novel agents and ASCT report a statistical cure fraction of more than 15%.1,22 The
 
addition of quadruplet combinations including mAbs as part of front-line therapies and novel immunotherapy strategies seems to further increase this apparent cure rate.

PERSONALISED MEDICINE
The presence of t(11;14) in RRMM patients should be investigated to decide for venetoclax-based regimens, when available in Europe. Otherwise, no prognostic factor or staging system, including R-ISS or gene-expression profiling, is used routinely to define a risk-adapted strategy. In myeloma, more research is needed to identify molecular markers which could lead to advances in personalised medicine.

METHODOLOGY
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accor- dance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development www.esmo.org/ Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. An interdisci- plinary panel of clinical experts on MM, members of ESMO, EHA and EMN, selected the relevant literature. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendations were assigned according to the adapted Infectious Diseases Society of America-United States Public Health Service Grading System (Supplementary Table S7, available at https://doi.org/10.1 016/j.annonc. 2020.11.014).89 Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank all those who contributed to this manuscript on behalf of the EHA and ESMO.

FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.

DISCLOSURE
MAD reported consultancy and honoraria from Janssen, Celgene, Takeda, Amgen and Bristol Myers Squibb; PM re- ported honoraria from Celgene, Janssen, Takeda, Amgen and Abbvie; ET reported honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen, Celgene, Takeda, Genesis Pharma, Amgen, Sanofi and Novartis; research funding from Janssen, Amgen, Takeda, Sanofi and Genesis Pharma; MVM reported honoraria from lectures and boards from Janssen, Celgene, Amgen, Takeda, Abbvie, GlaxoSmithKline, Adaptive, Roche and Seattle Ge- netics; SZ reported participation in advisory boards for Takeda, Celgene, Janssen, Sanofi and Oncopeptides and research funding from Celgene, Janssen and Takeda; GC re- ported being a member of speaker bureau for Takeda, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Amgen, Sanofi and Janssen and has received research grants from Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene
 

Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	319
 
Annals of Oncology	M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

 
and Takeda; MD reported honoraria from Abbvie, Adaptive Biotechnologies, Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen, Karyopharm, Sanofi and Takeda and has received research funding from Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen and Takeda; RH reported consultant or advisory roles for Janssen, Amgen, Celgene, AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, PharmaMar and Takeda; honoraria from Janssen, Amgen, Celgene, Bristol Myers Squibb, PharmaMar and Takeda and has received research grants from Janssen, Amgen, Celgene, Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis and Takeda; FS reported honoraria from Amgen, Celgene, Bristol Myers Squibb, Takeda, Abbvie, Janssen, Novartis, SkyliteDX, Onco- peptides, Sanofi, GlaxoSmithKline, Adaptive and Merck Sharp & Dohme; MC reported honoraria from Janssen, Celgene, Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Takeda, AbbVie, Sanofi and Adaptive Biotechnologies and speaker’s bureau membership for Janssen and Celgene; HG reported grants from Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Chugai, Dietmar-Hopp- Foundation, Janssen, John Hopkins University and Sanofi; research support from Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Chugai, Janssen, Incyte, Molecular Partners, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Sanofi, Mundipharma, Takeda and Novartis; participation in advisory boards for Adaptive Biotechnology, Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen, Sanofi and Takeda; honoraria from Academy2 GmbH & Co. KG, Amgen, ArtTempi, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Chop GmbH, Chugai, FomF GmbH, GlaxoSmithKline, GWT Forschung und Innovation Dresden, InVo Institut für Versorgungsforschung in der Onkologie GbR, Janssen, Kompetenznetz Maligne Lymphome (KML), MedConcept GmbH, Medical Communi- cation GmbH, New Concept Oncology, Novartis, Omnia Med Deutschland and Sanofi; TF reported speaker and advisory roles for Janssen, Bristol Myers Squibb and Takeda; role for Roche, Sanofi, Karyopharm and Oncopeptides and speaker role for Amgen; HE reported consulting and advisory roles for Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen, Amgen, Takeda, Sanofi and GlaxoSmithKline; research funding from Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen, Amgen, GlaxoSmithKline and Sanofi; honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Amgen, Takeda, Sanofi and GlaxoSmithKline; MB has received honoraria from Sanofi, Celgene, Amgen, Janssen, Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb and AbbVie; has served on advisory boards for Janssen and GlaxoSmithKline; has received research funding from Sanofi, Celgene, Amgen, Janssen, Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb and Mundipharma; JS-M reported consultancy for Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, Takeda, Sanofi and Roche; PS reported honoraria and advisory roles for Celgene, Janssen, Amgen, Takeda, Bristol Myers Squibb and Skyline and research funding from Celgene, Amgen, Janssen and Takeda; UM re- ported honoraria from Celgene, Janssen, Amgen, Takeda, AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb and Sanofi.

REFERENCES
1.	Usmani SZ, Hoering A, Cavo M, et al. Clinical predictors of long-term survival in newly diagnosed transplant eligible multiple myeloma - an IMWG Research Project. Blood Cancer J. 2018;8:123.
2.	 
Moreau P, San Miguel J, Sonneveld P, et al. Multiple myeloma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2017;28:iv52-iv61.
3.	Kumar S, Paiva B, Anderson KC, et al. International Myeloma Working Group consensus criteria for response and minimal residual disease assessment in multiple myeloma. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17: e328-e346.
4.	Perrot A, Lauwers-Cances V, Corre J, et al. Minimal residual disease negativity using deep sequencing is a major prognostic factor in multiple myeloma. Blood. 2018;132:2456-2464.
5.	Munshi NC, Avet-Loiseau H, Rawstron AC, et al. Association of minimal residual disease with superior survival outcomes in patients with multiple myeloma: a meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3:28-35.
6.	Cavo M, Terpos E, Nanni C, et al. Role of (18)F-FDG PET/CT in the diagnosis and management of multiple myeloma and other plasma cell disorders: a consensus statement by the International Myeloma Working Group. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18:e206-e217.
7.	Avet-Loiseau H, Ludwig H, Landgren O, et al. Minimal residual disease status as a surrogate endpoint for progression-free survival in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma studies: a meta-analysis. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2020;20:e30-e37.
8.	Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos MA, Palumbo A, et al. International Myeloma Working Group updated criteria for the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:e538-548.
9.	Rajkumar SV, Landgren O, Mateos MV. Smoldering multiple myeloma.
Blood. 2015;125:3069-3075.
10.	Mateos MV, Hernandez MT, Giraldo P, et al. Lenalidomide plus dexa- methasone for high-risk smoldering multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:438-447.
11.	Mateos MV, Hernandez MT, Giraldo P, et al. Lenalidomide plus dexa- methasone versus observation in patients with high-risk smouldering multiple myeloma (QuiRedex): long-term follow-up of a randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17:1127-1136.
12.	Lonial S, Jacobus S, Fonseca R, et al. Randomized trial of lenalidomide versus observation in smoldering multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38:1126-1137.
13.	Landgren CO, Chari A, Cohen YC, et al. Daratumumab monotherapy for patients with intermediate-risk or high-risk smoldering multiple myeloma: a randomized, open-label, multicenter, phase 2 study (CENTAURUS). Leukemia. 2020;34:1840-1852.
14.	Cavo M, Gay F, Patriarca F, et al. Double autologous stem cell trans- plantation significantly prolongs progression-free survival and overall survival in comparison with single autotransplantation in newly diag- nosed multiple myeloma: an analysis of phase 3 EMN02/HO95 study. Blood. 2017;130(suppl 1):401.
15.	Attal M, Lauwers-Cances V, Hulin C, et al. Lenalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone with transplantation for myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:1311-1320.
16.	Cavo M, Gay F, Beksac M, et al. Autologous haematopoietic stem-cell transplantation versus bortezomib-melphalan-prednisone, with or without bortezomib-lenalidomide-dexamethasone consolidation ther- apy, and lenalidomide maintenance for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma (EMN02/HO95): a multicentre, randomised, open-label, phase 3 study. Lancet Haematol. 2020;7:e456-e468.
17.	Sonneveld P, Goldschmidt H, Rosinol L, et al. Bortezomib-based versus nonbortezomib-based induction treatment before autologous stem- cell transplantation in patients with previously untreated multiple myeloma: a meta-analysis of phase III randomized, controlled trials. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:3279-3287.
18.	Moreau P, Hulin C, Macro M, et al. VTD is superior to VCD prior to intensive therapy in multiple myeloma: results of the prospective IFM2013-04 trial. Blood. 2016;127:2569-2574.
19.	Mai EK, Bertsch U, Durig J, et al. Phase III trial of bortezomib, cyclo- phosphamide and dexamethasone (VCD) versus bortezomib, doxoru- bicin and dexamethasone (PAd) in newly diagnosed myeloma. Leukemia. 2015;29:1721-1729.
20.	Rosinol L, Oriol A, Rios R, et al. Bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexa- methasone as induction therapy prior to autologous transplant in multiple myeloma. Blood. 2019;134:1337-1345.
 

320	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021
 
M. A. Dimopoulos et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
21.	Voorhees PM, Kaufman JL, Laubach JP, et al. Daratumumab, lenalido- mide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone for transplant-eligible newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: the GRIFFIN trial. Blood. 2020;136:936- 945.
22.	Joseph NS, Kaufman JL, Dhodapkar MV, et al. Long-term follow-up results of lenalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone induction therapy and risk-adapted maintenance approach in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38:1928-1937.
23.	Rosinol L, Hebraud B, Oriol A, et al. Integrated analysis of bortezomib- lenalidomide-dexamethasone vs bortezomib-thalidomide-dexamethasone in transplant-eligible newly diagnosed myeloma. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2019;19(suppl):E1-E2.
24.	Moreau P, Attal M, Hulin C, et al. Bortezomib, thalidomide, and dexamethasone with or without daratumumab before and after autologous stem-cell transplantation for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma (CASSIOPEIA): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study. Lancet. 2019;394:29-38.
25.	Moreau P, Attal M, Hulin C, et al. Phase 3 randomized study of daratumumab bortezomib/thalidomide/dexamethasone (D-VTd) vs VTd in transplant-eligible newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: CASSI- OPEIA Part 1 results. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(suppl 15):8003.
26.	Gay F, Cerrato C, Petrucci M, et al. Efficacy of carfilzomib lenalidomide dexamethasone (KRd) with or without transplantation in newly diag- nosed myeloma according to risk status: results from the FORTE trial. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(suppl 15):8002.
27.	Blanes M, Lahuerta JJ, Gonzalez JD, et al. Intravenous busulfan and melphalan as a conditioning regimen for autologous stem cell trans- plantation in patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: a matched comparison to a melphalan-only approach. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2013;19:69-74.
28.	Blanes M, Lorenzo JI, Ribas P, et al. Intravenous busulfan plus melphalan versus melphalan alone as conditioning regimen for pa- tients with multiple myeloma. Ann Hematol. 2019;98:2013-2015.
29.	Roussel M, Hebraud B, Lauwers-Cances V, et al. Bortezomib and high- dose melphalan vs. high-dose melphalan as conditioning regimen before autologous stem cell transplantation in de novo multiple myeloma patients: a phase 3 study of the Intergroupe Francophone Du Myelome (IFM 2014-02). Blood. 2017;130(suppl 1):398.
30.	Stadtmauer EA, Pasquini MC, Blackwell B, et al. Autologous trans- plantation, consolidation, and maintenance therapy in multiple myeloma: results of the BMT CTN 0702 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37:589-597.
31.	Hari P, Pasquini M, Stadtmauer E, et al. Long-term follow-up of BMT CTN 0702 (STaMINA) of postautologous hematopoietic cell trans- plantation (autoHCT) strategies in the upfront treatment of multiple myeloma (MM). J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl 15):8506.
32.	Giralt S, Costa LJ, Maloney D, et al. Tandem autologous-autologous versus autologous-allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant for patients with multiple myeloma: long-term follow-up results from the Blood and Marrow Transplant Clinical Trials Network 0102 Trial. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2020;26:798-804.
33.	Attal M, Lauwers-Cances V, Marit G, et al. Lenalidomide maintenance after stem-cell transplantation for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1782-1791.
34.	McCarthy PL, Owzar K, Hofmeister CC, et al. Lenalidomide after stem- cell transplantation for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366: 1770-1781.
35.	McCarthy PL, Holstein SA, Petrucci MT, et al. Lenalidomide mainte- nance after autologous stem-cell transplantation in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: a meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35: 3279-3289.
36.	Jackson GH, Davies FE, Pawlyn C, et al. Lenalidomide maintenance versus observation for patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma (Myeloma XI): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2019;20:57-73.
37.	Goldschmidt H, Lokhorst HM, Mai EK, et al. Bortezomib before and after high-dose therapy in myeloma: long-term results from the phase III HOVON-65/GMMG-HD4 trial. Leukemia. 2018;32:383-390.
38.	Dimopoulos MA, Gay F, Schjesvold F, et al. Oral ixazomib maintenance following autologous stem cell transplantation (TOURMALINE-MM3): a
 
double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2019;393:253-264.
39.	San Miguel JF, Schlag R, Khuageva NK, et al. Bortezomib plus melphalan and prednisone for initial treatment of multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:906-917.
40.	Benboubker L, Dimopoulos MA, Dispenzieri A, et al. Lenalidomide and dexamethasone in transplant-ineligible patients with myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:906-917.
41.	Durie BGM, Hoering A, Abidi MH, et al. Bortezomib with lenalidomide and dexamethasone versus lenalidomide and dexamethasone alone in patients with newly diagnosed myeloma without intent for immediate autologous stem-cell transplant (SWOG S0777): a randomised, open- label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2017;389:519-527.
42.	Kumar S, Jacobus S, Cohen A, et al. Carfilzomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone (KRd) versus bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexa- methasone (VRd) for initial therapy of newly diagnosed multiple myeloma (NDMM): results of ENDURANCE (E1A11) phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl18). abstr LBA3.
43.	Mateos MV, Dimopoulos MA, Cavo M, et al. Daratumumab plus bor- tezomib, melphalan, and prednisone for untreated myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:518-528.
44.	Mateos MV, Cavo M, Blade J, et al. Overall survival with daratumumab, bortezomib, melphalan, and prednisone in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma (ALCYONE): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2020;395:132-141.
45.	Facon T, Kumar S, Plesner T, et al. Daratumumab plus lenalidomide and dexamethasone for untreated myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:2104- 2115.
46.	Ponisch W, Mitrou PS, Merkle K, et al. Treatment of bendamustine and prednisone in patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma results in superior complete response rate, prolonged time to treatment failure and improved quality of life compared to treatment with melphalan and prednisone–a randomized phase III study of the East German Study Group of Hematology and Oncology (OSHO). J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2006;132:205-212.
47.	Palumbo A, Hajek R, Delforge M, et al. Continuous lenalidomide treatment for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1759-1769.
48.	Dimopoulos  M,  ˇSpiˇcka  I,  Quach  H,  et  al.  Ixazomib  as  postinduction
maintenance for patients with newly diagnosed multiple lyeloma not undergoing autologous stem cell transplantation: The phase III TOURMALINE-MM4 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(34):4030-4041.
49.	Cook G, Ashcroft AJ, Cairns DA, et al. The effect of salvage autologous stem-cell transplantation on overall survival in patients with relapsed multiple myeloma (final results from BSBMT/UKMF Myeloma X Relapse [Intensive]): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Haematol. 2016;3:e340-351.
50.	Goldschmidt H, Baertsch MA, Schlenzka J, et al. Salvage autologous transplant and lenalidomide maintenance vs. lenalidomide/ dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma: the randomized GMMG phase III trial ReLApsE. Leukemia. 2020. In press.
51.	Giralt S, Garderet L, Durie B, et al. American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, European Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Blood and Marrow Transplant Clinical Trials Network, and International Myeloma Working Group consensus conference on salvage hematopoietic cell transplantation in patients with relapsed multiple myeloma. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2015;21:2039-2051.
52.	Miller KC, Gertz MA, Buadi FK, et al. The impact of re-induction prior to salvage autologous stem cell transplantation in multiple myeloma. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2019;54:2039-2050.
53.	Stewart AK, Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos MA, et al. Carfilzomib, lenali- domide, and dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:142-152.
54.	Dimopoulos MA, Oriol A, Nahi H, et al. Daratumumab, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2016;375: 1319-1331.
55.	Moreau P, Masszi T, Grzasko N, et al. Oral ixazomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:1621- 1634.
 

Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	321
 
Annals of Oncology	M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

 
56.	Lonial S, Dimopoulos M, Palumbo A, et al. Elotuzumab therapy for relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:621-631.
57.	Siegel DS, Dimopoulos MA, Ludwig H, et al. Improvement in overall sur- vival with carfilzomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone in patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36:728-734.
58.	Dimopoulos M, Weisel K, Lonial S, et al. Elotuzumab plus lenalidomide/ dexamethasone for relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma: Final overall survival results from the phase 3 ELOQUENT-2 trial. 17th International Myeloma Workshop, Boston, September 12-15, 2019. Abstract OAB-021.
59.	Harousseau JL, Dimopoulos MA, Wang M, et al. Better quality of response to lenalidomide plus dexamethasone is associated with improved clinical outcomes in patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. Haematologica. 2010;95:1738-1744.
60.	Dimopoulos MA, Goldschmidt H, Niesvizky R, et al. Carfilzomib or bortezomib in relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (ENDEAVOR): an interim overall survival analysis of an open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18:1327-1337.
61.	Palumbo A, Chanan-Khan A, Weisel K, et al. Daratumumab, bortezo- mib, and dexamethasone for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:754-766.
62.	Richardson PG, Oriol A, Beksac M, et al. Pomalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone for patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma previously treated with lenalidomide (OPTIMISMM): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2019;20:781-794.
63.	Usmani S, Quach H, Mateos M-V, et al. Carfilzomib, dexamethasone, and daratumumab versus carfilzomib and dexamethasone for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (RRMM): Primary analysis results from the randomized, open-label, phase 3 study Candor (NCT03158688). Blood. 2019;134. LBA-6.
64.	Moreau P, Dimopoulos M, Mikhael J, et al. Isatuximab plus carfilzomib and dexamethasone vs carfilzomib and dexamethasone in relapsed/ refractory multiple myeloma (IKEMA): interim analysis of a phase 3, randomized, open-label study. Presented at: The European Hematology Association 25th Annual Congress; June 11-21, 2020: Virtual Congress. Abstract LBA2603.
65.	Gavriatopoulou M, Kastritis E, Ntanasis-Stathopoulos I, et al.The addition of IMiDs for patients with daratumumab-refractory multiple myeloma can overcome refractoriness to both agents. Blood. 2018;131:464-467.
66.	Nooka AK, Joseph NS, Kaufman JL, et al. Clinical efficacy of dar- atumumab, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone in patients with relapsed or refractory myeloma: utility of re-treatment with dar- atumumab among refractory patients. Cancer. 2019;125:2991-3000.
67.	Harrison S, Cavo M, De La Rubia J, et al. T(11;14) and high BCL2 expression are predictive biomarkers of response to venetoclax in combination with bortezomib and dexamethasone in patients with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma: Biomarker analyses from the phase 3 Bellini study. Blood. 2019;134:142.
68.	Dimopoulos M, Delimpasi S, Simonova M, et al. Weekly selinexor, bortezomib, and dexamethasone (SVd) versus twice weekly bortezo- mib and dexamethasone (Vd) in patients with multiple myeloma (MM) after one to three prior therapies: initial results of the phase III BOS- TON study. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl 15). abstr 8501.
69.	Dimopoulos MA, Richardson PG, Moreau P, Anderson KC. Current treatment landscape for relapsed and/or refractory multiple myeloma. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015;12:42-54.
70.	Gandhi UH, Cornell RF, Lakshman A, et al. Outcomes of patients with multiple myeloma refractory to CD38-targeted monoclonal antibody therapy. Leukemia. 2019;33:2266-2275.
71.	Dimopoulos MA, Dytfeld D, Grosicki S, et al. Elotuzumab plus poma- lidomide and dexamethasone for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:1811-1822.
72.	Attal M, Richardson PG, Rajkumar SV, et al. Isatuximab plus pomali- domide and low-dose dexamethasone versus pomalidomide and low-dose dexamethasone in patients with relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma (ICARIA-MM): a randomised, multicentre, open- label, phase 3 study. Lancet. 2019;394:2096-2107.
73.	 
Chari A, Suvannasankha A, Fay JW, et al. Daratumumab plus pomali- domide and dexamethasone in relapsed and/or refractory multiple myeloma. Blood. 2017;130:974-981.
74.	Chari A, Vogl DT, Gavriatopoulou M, et al. Oral selinexor- dexamethasone for triple-class refractory multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:727-738.
75.	Lonial S, Lee HC, Badros A, et al. Belantamab mafodotin for relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (DREAMM-2): a two-arm, randomised, open-label, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21:207- 221.
76.	Richardson PG, Bringhen S, Voorhees P, et al. Melﬂufen plus dexa- methasone in relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma (O-12-M1): a multicentre, international, open-label, phase 1-2 study. Lancet Hae- matol. 2020;7:e395-e407.
77.	Raje N, Berdeja J, Lin Y, et al. Anti-BCMA CAR T-cell therapy bb2121 in relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2019;380: 1726-1737.
78.	Fernandez de Larrea C, Kyle RA, Durie BG, et al. Plasma cell leukemia: consensus statement on diagnostic requirements, response criteria and treatment recommendations by the International Myeloma Working Group. Leukemia. 2013;27:780-791.
79.	Gavriatopoulou M, Musto P, Caers J, et al. European Myeloma Network recommendations on diagnosis and management of patients with rare plasma cell dyscrasias. Leukemia. 2018;32:1883-1898.
80.	Musto P, Simeon V, Martorelli MC, et al. Lenalidomide and low-dose dexamethasone for newly diagnosed primary plasma cell leukemia. Leukemia. 2014;28:222-225.
81.	Royer B, Minvielle S, Diouf M, et al. Bortezomib, doxorubicin, cyclo- phosphamide, dexamethasone induction followed by stem cell trans- plantation for primary plasma cell leukemia: a prospective phase II study of the Intergroupe Francophone du Myelome. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34:2125-2132.
82.	Van De Donk NWCJ, van der Holt B, Schjesvold FH, et al. Treat- ment of primary plasma cell leukemia with carfilzomib and lenalidomide-based therapy: results of the first interim analysis of the phase 2 EMN12/HOVON129 study. Blood. 2019;134(suppl_1): 693.
83.	Dhakal B, Patel S, Girnius S, et al. Hematopoietic cell transplantation utilization and outcomes for primary plasma cell leukemia in the cur- rent era. Leukemia. 2020;34:3338-3347.
84.	Dimopoulos MA, Hamilos G. Solitary bone plasmacytoma and extramedullary plasmacytoma. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2002;3:255- 259.
85.	Caers J, Garderet L, Kortum KM, et al. European Myeloma Network recommendations on tools for the diagnosis and monitoring of mul- tiple myeloma: what to use and when. Haematologica. 2018;103:1772- 1784.
86.	Paiva B, Chandia M, Vidriales MB, et al. Multiparameter ﬂow cytometry for staging of solitary bone plasmacytoma: new criteria for risk of progression to myeloma. Blood. 2014;124:1300-1303.
87.	Dimopoulos MA, Hillengass J, Usmani S, et al. Role of magnetic reso- nance imaging in the management of patients with multiple myeloma: a consensus statement. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33:657-664.
88.	Tsang RW, Campbell BA, Goda JS, et al. Radiation therapy for solitary plasmacytoma and multiple myeloma: guidelines from the Interna- tional Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2018;101:794-808.
89.	Dykewicz CA, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Infectious Diseases Society of America, American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportu- nistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33:139-144 (Adapted from: Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18:421).
90.	Alonso R, Cedena MT, Wong S, et al. Prolonged lenalidomide mainte- nance therapy improves the depth of response in multiple myeloma. Blood Adv. 2020;4:2163-2171.
 



322	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014	Volume 32 ■ Issue 3 ■ 2021
