
 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
 
Annals of Oncology 29 (Supplement 4): iv1–iv18, 2018 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy001
Published online 25 April 2018; updated 04 October 2018
 

 

 

I. Ray-Coquard1, P. Morice2, D. Lorusso3, J. Prat4, A. Oaknin5, P. Pautier2 & N. Colombo6, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Centre Leon Be´rard, University Claude Bernard Lyon & GINECO group, Lyon; 2Gustave Roussy & GINECO group, Villejuif, France; 3Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy; 4Hospital de Sant Pau, Autonomous University of Barcelona; 5Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain; 6University of Milan-Bicocca and European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via L. Taddei 4, CH-6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: August 2008, last update December 2017. This publication supersedes the previously published version—Ann Oncol 2012; 23(Suppl 7): vii20–vii26.


 

 
Non-epithelial ovarian tumours account for approximately 10% of all ovarian cancers. Malignant germ cell tumours (GCTs) occur mainly in young women whereas the most common type of sex cord-stromal tumours (SCSTs), i.e. granulosa cell tumour, occurs more often in middle age and in postmenopausal women [1]. Malignant GCTs represent 5% of all ovarian cancers and 80% of the preadolescent malignant ovarian tumours. SCSTs are rare neoplasms that account for approximately 3%–5% of ovarian malignancies and the majority of ovarian tumours with endocrine manifestations. The yearly-adjusted incidence rate is 3.7/1 000 000 and 2.1/1 000 000 women for GCTs and SCSTs, respectively [1]. Small cell carcinoma of the ovary (SCCO) usu- ally affects young women and children [2] with a very low inci- dence (less than 1% of ovarian cancers) [1]. Unlike GCTs, SCSTs and steroid cell tumours are unilateral and occur over a wide range of age; for instance, granulosa cell tumours and thecomas are found mainly in peri- and postmenopausal women, whereas juvenile granulosa cell tumours, Sertoli cell tumours and Sertoli– Leydig cell tumours (SLCTs) usually develop in adolescents and young females in whom maintenance of fertility is important [3].


The initial symptoms and signs of non-epithelial ovarian cancers are usually a subacute pelvic pain, feeling of pelvic pressure because of a pelvic mass and menstrual irregularities. Diagnostic work-up should include pelvic ultrasound, abdomino-pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan, chest X-ray and positron emission tomog- raphy (PET) scan in selected cases (GCTs) [III, B]. In young
 
patients, serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), alpha- foetoprotein (a-FP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels, full blood count and liver and renal function tests should be carried out. Inhibin B is secreted by granulosa cell tumours and could be a useful  marker  for  the  disease.  Serum  anti-Mu¨llerian  hormone (AMH) may be a marker of ovarian reserve and granulosa cell tumours in postmenopausal or post-oophorectomy women [4]. While these markers are nonspecific, they can provide prognostic information, so quantitative hCG, a-FP, LDH and cancer antigen 125 (CA 125) should be measured preoperatively [5]. If gonado- blastoma is suspected, a preoperative karyotype should be obtained on all premenarche girls because of the propensity of these tumours to arise in dysgenetic gonads.
Most non-epithelial ovarian tumours arise from cells specific
to the ovary (germ cells, granulosa cells, theca cells, stromal fibro- blasts and steroid cells); other less common gonadal tumours arise from non-specific ovarian cells (mesenchymal cells). The World Health Organization (WHO) classification of GCTs is pre- sented in Table 1 [6, 7]. GCTs recapitulate steps of development, from undifferentiated germ cells to adult tissues. Primitive GCTs composed of undifferentiated germ cells and GCTs with extraem- bryonic differentiation are all malignant. Teratomas are the most common GCTs; most are composed of mature tissues and are benign (dermoid cysts). In immature teratomas, embryonic tis- sues indicate the malignant potential and grading is prognosti-
cally relevant [7]. Grade 1 tumours show rare foci of immature neuroepithelial tissue that occupy < 1 low power field (40×) in any slide (low grade); grade 2 tumours show similar elements, occupying 1–3 low power fields (40×) in any slide (high grade); grade 3 tumours exhibit large amounts of immature neuroepithe- lial tissue occupying > 3 low power fields (40×) in any slide (high
 

VC   The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 

 



 
grade). A two-tiered (low and high grades) system is now more commonly used [8]. Other rare malignant GCTs constitute a het- erogeneous group including somatic cancers arising in dermoids and monodermal teratomas [7]. In the elderly, non- dysgerminoma GCTs arise from epithelial ovarian cancer, usually endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas. Primitive GCTs and immature teratomas are chemosensitive and susceptible to fertility-sparing surgery. Because of their chemosensitivity and the increasing adoption of fertility-sparing surgery, correct pathological diagnosis is essential and these cases should be examined by gynaecological pathologists [V, B]. Diagnosis can be made on conventional histological material; given the multiplic- ity of morphological features, immunohistochemical markers (Table 2) and chromosome 12p fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) can be used to confirm the diagnosis in difficult cases. SALL4 and OCT4 are widely used; more recently, it has been rec- ognised that SOX2 is expressed in embryonal carcinoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumours of teratomatous origin.
SCSTs and steroid cell tumours constitute a heterogeneous
group of tumours (Table 3) and vary in their capacity to produce clinically significant amounts of steroid hormones. Granulosa cell tumours are typically oestrogenic and may be associated with various clinical syndromes, depending upon the age of the patient. SLCTs typically produce androgens, and clinical virilisa- tion is observed in 70%–85% of patients. Those with sex cord ele- ments may be malignant, with granulosa cell tumours being the
most frequent histological type. Neoplasms of pure ovarian stroma are mostly benign, with > 50% of them being fibromas. In morphologically ambiguous cases, an immunopanel of inhibin alpha, calretinin and FOXL2, together with FOXL2 (402C-G) mutational analysis, is useful to confirm the diagnosis of adult
granulosa cell tumours (AGCTs) [V, B] [9]. Chang et al. demon- strated that another molecule involved in the tumourigenesis of
 









AGCTs is activin A [10]. A subset of SCSTs is typically negative for FOXL2 on immunostaining (retiform or poorly differentiated SLCT), but these tumours usually express inhibin alpha and/or calretinin. Another recent finding has been the occurrence of DICER1 mutations in SCST [V, C].
Small cell carcinomas of the ovary hypercalcaemic type (SCCOHTs) are the most common form of ovarian undifferenti- ated carcinomas in women < 40 years old and the most common ovarian tumour associated with hypercalcaemia (70%). This tumour is typically unilateral and should be distinguished from primitive GCTs and granulosa cell tumours (mainly juvenile).
Although its histogenesis is unknown, recent reports suggest that it may represent an ovarian malignant rhabdoid tumour [11]. Recent studies have identified mutations in the SWItch/Sucrose Non-Fermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin-remodelling gene, SMARCA4 encoding BRG1. These mutations represent a frequent event occurring in 76%–100% of SCCOHTs [12–14]. Germline mutations in SMARCA4 or SMARCB1 were already known to pre- dispose to the development of paediatric tumours, namely atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumours [15, 16]. SMARCA4 immunohisto- chemistry is highly sensitive and specific for a diagnosis of SCCOHT [loss of SMARCA4 (BRG1) protein expression] and is now useful in the differential diagnosis of poorly differentiated ovarian tumours [17]. SCCOHTs usually react diffusely for WT1, making the interpretation difficult. Differential diagnosis includes
 
juvenile or adult granulosa tumours, metastatic melanoma, dys- germinoma, Ewing tumour and undifferentiated carcinoma.


 
Prognostic factors

The staging system for non-epithelial ovarian cancers is generally adopted from the one for epithelial ovarian cancer originally defined by the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) (Table 4) [18]. Outcomes appear to be supe- rior when patients are treated in a large cancer centre, likely due to the rare nature and infrequent presentation of these cancers [19].
Outcomes may depend on the age at diagnosis. Premenarche girls and women > 45 years who develop GCTs may have differ- ent tumour biology and a worse prognosis than postadolescent females in the reproductive years. Patients with testicular cancer
are stratified as having good, intermediate or high risk for
 
recurrence based on clinical, pathological and serological markers. Compared with testicular cancer, clinical prognostica- tors are less well defined for ovarian GCTs. Adverse factors include age > 45 years, stage > I, incomplete surgical resection and yolk sac tumour (YST) histology [20, 21].
Stage is also an important prognostic factor for SCSTs, although advanced-stage diseases can also have a good prognosis because of their sensitivity to chemotherapy (ChT). The FIGO
stage [18] and the intraperitoneal tumour rupture are the most often reported prognostic factors. Patient age (> 50 years) and the size of the tumour (> 5 cm) have a less certain prognostic value [5]. The majority of these tumours can be cured, but
around 20% relapse or give rise to metastases that can be fatal [III, A].
Prognosis of SCCOHT is poor with only 30%–40% long-term survivors with standard treatment [2]. Potential favourable prog- nostic factors, in addition to disease stage (stage IA versus others) are: age > 30 years; normal pre-operative calcium level; a tumour
size < 10 cm; the absence of large cells; and complete surgical
resection including bilateral oophorectomy [22, 23].
 

Table 4. 2014 FIGO ovarian cancer staging system and corresponding TNM

TNM staging	FIGO staging	Description

T1a-N0-M0	Stage IA	Tumour limited to one ovary (capsule intact), no tumour on ovarian surface; no malignant
cells in ascites or peritoneal washings; no regional lymph node metastasis; no distant metastasis
T1b-N0-M0	Stage IB	Tumour limited to both ovaries (capsules intact), no tumour on ovarian surface; no malignant
cells in ascites or peritoneal washings; no regional lymph node metastasis; no distant metastasis
T1c-N0-M0	Stage IC1	Tumour limited to one or both ovaries with capsule ruptured (surgical spill); no regional
lymph node metastasis; no distant metastasis
T1c-N0-M0	Stage IC2	Tumour limited to one or both ovaries with capsule ruptured before surgery or tumour on
ovarian surface; no regional lymph node metastasis; no distant metastasis
T1c-N0-M0	Stage IC3	Tumour limited to one or both ovaries with malignant cells in ascites or peritoneal washings;
no regional lymph node metastasis; no distant metastasis
T2a-N0-M0	Stage IIA	Extension and/or implants on the uterus and/or tube(s); no malignant cells in ascites or peri-
toneal washings; no regional lymph node metastasis; no distant metastasis
T2b-N0-M0	Stage IIB	Extension to and/or implants in other pelvic tissues; no malignant cells in ascites or perito-
neal washings; no regional lymph node metastasis; no distant metastasis
 
T1/T2-N1-M0	Stage IIIA1

Stage IIIA1 (i) Stage IIIA1 (ii)
 
Tumour limited to the ovaries (one or both) (T1) or tumour involves one or both ovaries with pelvic extension (T2); regional lymph node metastasis; no distant metastasis
Metastasis up to 10 mm in greatest dimension Metastasis more than 10 mm in greatest dimension
 
T3a-N0/N1-M0	Stage IIIA2	Microscopic peritoneal metastasis beyond the pelvis (no macroscopic tumour); no regional
lymph node metastasis (N0) or regional lymph node metastasis (N1); no distant metastasis T3b-N0/N1-M0	Stage IIIB	Macroscopic peritoneal metastasis beyond the pelvis up to 2 cm in greatest dimension; no
regional lymph node metastasis (N0) or regional lymph node metastasis (N1); no distant metastasis
T3c-N0/N1-M0	Stage IIIC	Macroscopic peritoneal metastasis beyond the pelvis > 2 cm in greatest dimension and/or
regional lymph node metastasis; no regional lymph node metastasis (N0) or regional lymph node metastasis (N1); no distant metastasis
any T-any N-M1	Stage IVA	Pleural effusion with positive cytology
any T-any N-M1	Stage IVB	Parenchymal metastases and metastases to extra-abdominal organs (including inguinal
lymph nodes and lymph nodes outside of the abdominal cavity)

FIGO, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics; TNM, tumour, node, metastasis. Modiﬁed from [22] and [57].
 
Staging
A surgical approach can be carried out through open route or, in selected cases, by minimally invasive approaches—laparoscopy and robotics—to avoid tumour rupture during surgery. A careful examination of the abdominal cavity is required. The staging pro- cedure includes infracolic omentectomy, biopsy of the diaphrag- matic peritoneum, paracolic gutters, pelvic peritoneum and peritoneal washings in macroscopic stage I disease.

Germ cell tumours. There is no consensus about the role of sys- tematic lymphadenectomy, but the omission of staging perito- neal procedures seems to increase the recurrence rate [24], though without impact on overall survival [25]. GCTs, particu- larly dysgerminoma, have a high risk of nodal spread. On the other hand, given the very high chemosensitivity of such tumours, potential nodal metastasis should be cured by adjuvant ChT in these patients [III, A].
Thus, nodal debulking surgery is only required in rare cases of residual disease after ChT. In early-stage disease that does not require adjuvant ChT because of favourable prognostic factors, nodal dissection should be carried out only where there is evi- dence of nodal abnormalities during surgical exploration and/or initial CT scan (lymphadenopathy) [III, A]. Patients not under- going initial nodal staging surgery can be safely cured with ChT at the time of the potential nodal recurrence [26].
Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with preservation of the contralateral ovary and the uterus is now considered as the stand- ard surgical treatment for young patients with GCTs [III, A].
This conservative management should be considered even in the case of advanced disease because of the sensitivity of the tumour to ChT [IV, B] [27]. Systematic ovarian biopsy is not nec- essary when the contralateral ovary is macroscopically normal [III, A]. In case of macroscopic bilateral ovarian diseases (particularly dysgerminoma or immature teratoma), preservation of at least a healthy part of one ovary (unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and contralateral cystectomy) and the uterus should be encouraged [IV, B] [28]. In postmenopausal women and in patients with advanced-stage disease or with bilateral ovarian involvement, abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy could be carried out with careful surgical staging [III, A].

Sex cord-stromal tumours. The place of conservative treatment in child-bearing age patients affected by SCSTs is somewhat differ- ent. Preservation of the uterus and contralateral ovary seems to be safe in macroscopic stage IA disease but should not be carried
out in stages > I. Conservative surgery is also an acceptable approach in young patients with stage I SCSTs [IV, B]. In the case
of juvenile granulosa cell tumours, the safety of this management approach in stage IC disease remains controversial, particularly in stage IC2 or IC3 disease [V, C]. In case of conservative treat- ment, an endometrial curettage (or hysterectomy in case of radi- cal management) must be carried out to rule out concomitant uterine cancers in patients with granulosa cell tumour [IV, B]. For SCSTs, retroperitoneal evaluation is not mandatory because of the very low incidence of retroperitoneal metastases in early- stage disease [III, A]. Recent publications on incidence of lymph node metastases in SCST support the position that lymphadenec- tomy is not needed in these patients [29]. SLCTs frequently have
 
low-grade malignancy, although occasionally a retiform or poorly differentiated (sarcomatoid) form may be malignant. In postmenopausal women and in patients with advanced-stage dis- ease or with bilateral ovarian involvement, abdominal hysterec- tomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy should be carried out with careful surgical staging for SCST [III, A].

Small cell carcinomas of the ovary hypercalcaemic type. The prog- nosis of SCCOHT is very poor and the risk of extra-ovarian spread high. All suspected cases should benefit from a review by an expert pathologist and be discussed in a specialised tumour board [V, A]. Efforts should be made to treat patients in a more homogeneous way through national and international networks [V, A]. Conventional surgical treatment includes radical surgery (bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and hysterectomy) combined with perito- neal and nodal staging surgery, even for macroscopically stage I dis- ease [IV, A] [2]. The largest series to date reported a decline in survival in patients treated conservatively [2]. As a result of the adju- vant treatment after surgery combining high-dose ChT (HDCT) and radiotherapy (RT), the potential preservation of gonadal func- tion is considered to be only conceptual even if one ovary and the uterus are preserved [2]. Until now, no pregnancy has been reported after this type of de-escalating surgical management [2].


 
Germ cell tumours (Figures 1–3)

Most GCTs (60%–70%) are diagnosed at an early stage. Stage I patients have an excellent prognosis with long-term disease-free status of about 90%. Given the young age of patients, all efforts should be made to preserve fertility. Fertility-sparing surgery appears to be safe with excellent survival after long-term follow-up, yielding outcomes equivalent to patients undergoing hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy [III, A]. Stage IA pure dysgerminoma should be treated with surgery only [III, A] [24]. The recurrence rate in this group of patients is relatively low (15%–25%) and they can be success- fully treated at the time of relapse with a high likelihood of cure. Patients with stage IA grade 1 immature teratoma do not require fur- ther adjuvant ChT after adequate surgical staging [III, A]. The need for adjuvant ChT in stage IA G2–G3 and IB–IC is still controversial [5]. Some published data (risk of relapse ranging from 2%–20% for grade 2 to 20%–40% for grade 3 immature teratoma) indicate that all grades of immature teratoma and all stage I dysgerminomas can be managed with close surveillance after fertility-sparing surgery [III, B], reserving ChT for those cases in which post-surgery recurrence is documented [24, 30]. However, this policy is not universally accepted; the benefit of not having ChT (i.e. the avoided risk weighed against the risk of relapse and delayed treatment) needs to be discussed with the patient. All patients with stage I YSTs are treated with adjuvant ChT after surgery [31]. Recent data on paediatric patients suggest close surveillance for stage I YSTs with complete surgical staging and nega- tive postoperative a-FP, reserving ChT for patients who experience recurrence [30], but this policy is not widely accepted [III, C].
Data from the literature show that the most used combination is the 5-day bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin (BEP) regimen [III, A] [31].
 

 

 	 	 

 
Fertility-sparing surgery Surgical staging
[III, A]
 
Debulking/Staging [III, A] or
Fertility-sparing surgery when indicated [IV, B]
 



Properly-staged patients




 

Yes	No
 
> 40 years or with PD
 

 

BEP x 3–4 cycles [III, A]














Figure 1. Management of GCTs of the ovary—dysgerminoma.
*See Table 5.
BEP, bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin; EP, etoposide/cisplatin; GCT, germ cell tumour; PD, pulmonary disease.

 
When ChT is not offered, a close and active surveillance pro- gramme should be proposed [III, C]. Vazquez and Rustin postulate a surveillance schedule involving regular clinical review with clinical
 
examination, radiological imaging including abdomen-pelvic sonography at regular intervals and the monitoring of tumour markers to detect relapse over a period of 10 years, with a gradual
 

 

 	 	 	 

 

 	 
Figure 2. Management of GCTs of the ovary—immature teratoma.
*See Table 5.
      Optional
BEP, bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin; GCT, germ cell tumour.
 

 


 

Fertility-sparing surgery Staging
[III, A]
 
Debulking/Staging [III, A]
or
Fertility-sparing surgery Staging
[IV, B]
 










 
Properly-staged patients with negative postoperative
tumours markers
 

BEP x 3–4 cycles [III, A]
 








 	 
Figure 3. Management of GCTs of the ovary—yolk sac tumour.
*See Table 5.
      Optional
BEP, bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin; GCT, germ cell tumour; GoR, grade of recommendation.
 

 

 

 

increase of the interval between clinical appointments [III, C] [32]. This is summarised in Table 5 [32]. Patient adherence to the demanding visit schedule is of paramount importance. It is extremely important to advise patients against pregnancy during the first 2 years after initial diagnosis, as most relapses occur during this time [1]. Whenever possible, patients undergoing active surveillance protocols should be included in trials or prospective registries.

Sex cord-stromal tumours (Figures 4 and 5)
Most SCSTs (60%–95%) are diagnosed at an early stage. Stage IA granulosa cell tumours have an excellent prognosis after surgery alone and do not require adjuvant therapy [III, A].
The selection of early-stage SCST patients for any postopera- tive treatment is controversial. To date, the relative benefit of adjuvant ChT has yet to be demonstrated. Some authors would suggest adjuvant therapy for juvenile granulosa tumour stage IC patients [IV, B]; in this case, platinum-based ChT is the treatment of choice [III, A]. Also, more relapses were reported for patients with AGCT stage IC2 compared with stage IC1 [33]; in this case, adjuvant ChT can be discussed [IV, C].
The most commonly used regimen is the BEP combination [III,
A] [5]. Alternative ChT options include: paclitaxel and carboplatin
 
[III, B] [34]; etoposide/cisplatin (EP); cyclophosphamide/doxorubi- cin/cisplatin (CAP); or a platinum agent alone [III, A]. Due to the rel- ative toxicity of BEP versus carboplatin/paclitaxel, particularly in older age groups, and the limited evidence to support its use (some
non-randomised series suggest carboplatin/paclitaxel may be as effec- tive as BEP), bleomycin should not be given to patients > 40 years old or with pre-existing pulmonary disease [III, A].
For SLCTs, postoperative adjuvant ChT should be considered for those patients with stage I poorly differentiated or with heter- ologous elements [IV, B].
Small cell carcinomas of the ovary hypercalcaemic type
There is no international consensus regarding the optimal treat- ment of SCCOHT; a multimodal approach including ChT [III, B], radical surgery [IV, A] and possibly RT [IV, C] is often proposed (Figure 6). However, no randomised studies have been conducted to date, and the available published data are composed of case reports or small retrospective series with very heterogeneous man- agement strategies [35].
SCCOHTs are particularly chemosensitive at the outset but
there is a risk for a rapid relapse. The choice of regimen is gener- ally extrapolated from data in small cell lung carcinoma. A com- bination of a cisplatin and etoposide-based therapy is generally considered most appropriate [III, B] [23, 36]. More recently, HDCT for patients who achieved a complete response (CR; after surgery and/or ChT) with autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) rescue has been proposed and is associated with better survival [II, C] [24, 36, 37].


 
Germ cell tumours

Fertility-sparing surgery should also be considered in advanced stages disease as cure rates remain high [IV, B]. The aim of surgery is to remove as much gross tumour as possible; however, the proce- dure should be moderated to avoid delays in postoperative ChT and
 

 

 	 	 	 

 
Figure 4. Management of SCSTs of the ovary—granulosa cell tumour.
*See Table 5.
      Optional
BEP, bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin; BSO, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy; ChT, chemotherapy; EP, etoposide/cisplatin; SCST, sex cord-stromal tumour; TAH, total abdominal hysterectomy.
 

 

 
Young patients
No	Yes

With poorly differentiated or heterologous elements
 
No	Yes













Figure 5. Management of SCSTs of the ovary—Sertoli–Leydig cell tumour.
BEP, bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin; BSO, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy; ChT, chemotherapy; EP, etoposide/cisplatin; SCST, sex cord-stromal tumour; TAH, total abdominal hysterectomy.
 

 

   
Debulking feasible
Yes	No
 
Complete response/resection
Yes	No
 

 
Figure 6. Management of SCCOHT.
      Optional
ASCT, autologous stem cell transplantation; BSO, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy; ChT, chemotherapy; HDCT, high-dose chemotherapy; RT, radiotherapy; SCCOHT, small cell carcinomas of the ovary hypercalcaemic type; TAH, total abdominal hysterectomy.
 
Table 7. Summary of recommendations

Diagnosis and pathology/molecular biology
•	Diagnostic work-up should include pelvic ultrasound, abdomino-pelvic CT scan and chest X-ray and PET scan in selected cases (GCTs) [III, B]
•	In young adult patients, hCG, a-FP, LDH and inhibin B levels, full blood count and liver and renal function tests should be carried out
•	In case of suspected gonadoblastomas, a preoperative karyotype should be obtained on all premenarche girls
•	Histological second opinion by an expert pathologist should always be considered. Diagnosis can be made on conventional histological material [V, B]
•	Neoplasms of pure ovarian stroma: in morphologically ambiguous cases, an immunopanel of inhibin alpha, calretinin and FOXL2, plus mutational analysis for FOXL2 (402C-G), is useful to conﬁrm AGCTs [V, B]
Staging and risk assessment
•	A surgical approach can be carried out through open route or, in selected cases, by laparoscopy and robotics approaches, thereby avoiding tumour rup- ture during surgery
•	A careful examination of the abdominal cavity is required
•	The staging procedure includes infracolic omentectomy, biopsy of the diaphragmatic peritoneum, paracolic gutters, pelvic peritoneum and peritoneal washings (macroscopic stage I disease)
•	Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with preservation of the contralateral ovary and the uterus is considered an adequate surgical treatment for patients
with GCTs. This should be considered even in advanced disease because of the sensitivity of the tumour to ChT [IV, B]. No systematic ovarian biopsy is necessary when the contralateral ovary is macroscopically normal [III, A]
•	Given the very high chemosensitivity of GCTs, potential nodal metastasis should be cured by adjuvant ChT in these patients [III, A]
•	Nodal dissection should be carried out only if evidence of nodal abnormality [III, A]
•	For SCSTs, retroperitoneal evaluation is not mandatory [III, A]
•	An endometrial curettage must be carried out to rule out concomitant uterine cancers in patients with granulosa cell tumours [IV, B]
•	Conservative surgery is also an acceptable approach in young patients with stage I SCSTs [IV, B]
•	In postmenopausal women and in patients with advanced-stage disease or with bilateral ovarian involvement, abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy should be carried out with careful surgical staging for SCST [III, A]
Early-stage GCTs: management
•	Stage IA pure dysgerminoma should be treated with surgery only [III, A]
•	Patients with stage IA grade 1 immature teratoma do not require further adjuvant ChT after adequate surgical staging [III, A]
•	Adjuvant ChT in stage IA-IC G2-G3 immature teratoma, stage IA-IB YST with negative postoperative tumour markers and IB-IC dysgerminomas is recom- mended but active surveillance is an option [III, B]
•	5-day BEP is the most used regimen [III, A]
•	The close surveillance schedule involves regular clinical review with clinical examination, radiological imaging including abdomen-pelvic intravaginal sonography at regular intervals and the monitoring of tumour markers to detect relapse over a period of 10 years, with a gradual increase of the interval between clinical appointments [III, C]
Advanced-stage and recurrent GCTs: management
•	Fertility-sparing surgery should be considered also in advanced stages [IV, B]. The aim of surgery is to remove as much gross tumour as possible; however, the procedure should be moderated to avoid delays in postoperative ChT and long-term morbidity
•	In postmenopausal women with advanced-stage disease or with bilateral ovarian involvement, abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorec-
tomy could be carried out with careful surgical staging [III, A]
•	Platinum-based regimens are the treatment of choice with the BEP regimen being the most widely used, generally, three cycles of 5-day BEP regimen in completely resected disease and four cycles (bleomycin should be omitted to reduce the risk of lung toxicity after the third cycle) for patients with macro- scopic residual disease [III, A]
•	In patients previously treated with platinum, with platinum-sensitive relapse (progression > 4–6 weeks after completion of ChT), combinations with
platinum should be considered [IV, C]
•	Patients resistant to a cisplatin-based combination may receive VAC or paclitaxel/gemcitabine or gemcitabine/oxaliplatin as salvage therapy [IV, C]
•	HDCT for recurrent ovarian GCTs may result in durable and prolonged remissions [IV, C]
•	Any resectable residual disease should be removed, particularly for patients with normal serum marker and for patients with immature teratoma in order to avoid the growing teratoma syndrome [III, A]
Early-stage SCSTs: management
•	Stage IA granulosa cell tumour disease has an excellent prognosis after surgery alone and does not require adjuvant therapy [III, A]
•	Adjuvant therapy should be considered for juvenile granulosa tumour stage IC patients [IV, B] or for AGCT stage IC2-IC3 patients [IV, C]. In these cases, platinum-based ChT is the treatment of choice [III, A]
•	For SLCTs, postoperative adjuvant ChT should be considered for patients with stage I poorly differentiated or heterologous elements (mesenchymal type)
[IV, B]
•	BEP is the most commonly used regimen [III, A]. Alternative ChT options include paclitaxel and carboplatin [III, B], EP, CAP or platinum agent alone [III, A]
Advanced-stage and recurrent SCSTs: management
•	Debulking surgery remains the most effective treatment of advanced or recurrent granulosa cell tumour [III, A]
•	Platinum-based ChT is currently used for patients with advanced-stage SCSTs or recurrent disease [III, A]
•	BEP regimen for three cycles or six cycles of carboplatin/paclitaxel is recommended for postoperative ChT and patients with recurrent SCSTs [III, A]
Continued
 
Table 7. Continued
•	Patients with steroid cell tumours that are pleomorphic, large, at an advanced stage or with an increased mitotic count should be treated with additional postoperative platinum-based ChT, either BEP (if not previously used) or a taxane–platinum combination [IV, C]
•	Response to GnRH agonists, tamoxifen, progestin and AIs has been reported and could be an interesting option speciﬁcally for adult GCT [IV, B]
•	For patients with persistent SLCTs, adjuvant ChT should be considered [III, B]
Early and advanced SCCOHT: management
•	All suspected cases should beneﬁt from a review by an expert pathologist and be discussed in a specialised tumour board [V, A]
•	Optimal treatment: a multimodal approach including ChT [III, B], radical surgery [IV, A], HDCT [II, C] and RT [IV, C]
•	Debulking surgery (initial or interval) remains the most effective treatment [IV, A]
•	Combination of a cisplatin- and etoposide-based therapy is the most appropriate for all stages [III, B]
•	The use of pelvic RT, either concurrently or sequentially to HDCT and ASCT, may be considered for patients after surgery [IV, C]
•	Efforts should be made to treat patients in a more homogeneous way through national and international networks [V, A]
Response evaluation and follow-up after initial treatment
•	Serum tumour markers (hCG, a-FP, LDH, CA 125 and inhibin B) can correlate with tumour response during ChT [V, A]
•	A CT scan of the abdomen, pelvis and chest (in case of suspected lung metastases) and pelvic ultrasound are the most common and useful imaging techniques to evaluate the response to ChT [V, A]
•	For GCT, follow-up visits must include history, physical examination with pelvic examination and tumour markers every 3 months for the ﬁrst 2 years, then every 6 months during the third year and then yearly until progression [V, A]
•	For SCSTs, follow-up visits including physical exam and tumour markers must be carried out every 6 months starting from the third year and this frequency
should be maintained indeﬁnitely [V, B]
•	A pelvic ultrasound should be carried out every 6 months in those patients who have undergone fertility-sparing surgery, whereas a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis is carried out according to clinical indication
•	PET scan for tumour response evaluation or follow-up is not yet recommended [V, D]
Fertility and hormone replacement
•	Oocyte cryopreservation is an option for patients scheduled to receive ChT [V, C]
•	Hyperstimulation followed by oocyte cryopreservation 12 months after the end of ChT is another option [V, C]
•	Fertility preservation should not jeopardise the oncological management
•	HRT may be used safely for many GCTs [V, A]
•	An HRT approach should be avoided for SCST [V, D]

a-FP, alpha foetoprotein; AGCT, adult granulosa cell tumour; AI, aromatase inhibitor; ASCT, autologous stem cell transplantation; BEP, bleomycin/etoposide/ cisplatin; CA 125, cancer antigen 125; CAP, cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/cisplatin; ChT, chemotherapy; CT, computed tomography; EP, etoposide/cisplatin; GCT, germ cell tumour; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; HDCT, high-dose chemotherapy; HRT, hormone replacement therapy; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PET, positron emission tomography; RT, radiotherapy; SCCOHT, small cell carcinoma of the ovary hypercal- caemic type; SCST, sex cord-stromal tumour; SLCT, Sertoli-Leydig cell tumour; VAC, vincristine/actinomycin D/cyclophosphamide; YST, yolk sac tumour.



 
long-term morbidity. These tumours are highly chemosensitive but grow rapidly and may grow back if there is a delay in starting ChT.
Platinum-based regimens have been the treatment of choice and the 5-day-BEP regimen is the most widely used regimen [38]. While the optimal number of cycles of BEP has not been fully established in randomised trials, three cycles of BEP for com- pletely resected stage I disease and four cycles for those with more advanced disease are recommended [III, A] [2, 39]. Bleomycin
should not be given to those > 40 years of age or with pre-existing
pulmonary disease, given the risk of drug-related lung injury with an approximate mortality rate of 3% [III, A].
Alternative ChT regimens [POMB/ACE (cisplatin/vincristine/ methotrexate/bleomycin/actinomycin D/cyclophosphamide/eto- poside) and CBOP/BEP (carboplatin/bleomycin/vincristine/cis- platin/BEP)] have been evaluated, particularly in high-risk patients, reporting high activity and impacting toxicity: unfortu- nately, none of them has been compared with BEP in randomised trials. A phase II Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) trial reported high activity with an acceptable toxicity profile for a carboplatin–etoposide combination in   the   adjuvant   setting of completely resected stages I–III dysgerminomas [40].
 
Dysgerminomas are very sensitive to RT; however, its use is lim- ited to selected cases because of the negative impact on fertility.
In   patients   with   platinum-sensitive   relapse   (progression
> 4–6 weeks after completion of ChT), ifosfamide/platinum (IP) with or without paclitaxel (P) should be considered as second- line treatment [IV, C] [41]. Further active ChT regimens include:
vinblastine/ifosfamide/cisplatin (VeIP) and cisplatin/vinblastine/ bleomycin (PVB) [IV, C] [42]. Patients resistant to a cisplatin- based combination may receive vincristine/actinomycin D/cyclo- phosphamide (VAC) or paclitaxel/gemcitabine or gemcitabine/ oxaliplatin as salvage therapy [IV, C].
Although there is a role for ASCT in relapsed testicular cancer, it is not the standard of care for women with relapsed or recurrent malignant ovarian GCTs and its role remains undefined because of the paucity of prospective data. A recent report suggests that HDCT for recurrent ovarian GCTs may result in durable and pro- longed remissions [IV, C]. In a retrospective series, Reddy Ammakkanavar et al. [43] treated 13 patients with recurrent malignant ovarian GCTs from 1990 to 2013. All patients had expe- rienced disease progression after standard cisplatin combination treatment. HDCT consisted of tandem courses of carboplatin
 

 


700 mg/m2 and etoposide 750 mg/m2 intravenously (i.v.) daily for three consecutive days followed by stem cell infusion. Seven patients achieved CR with four of these seven patients remaining disease free at 12, 22, 120 and 270 months from treatment.
Any resectable residual disease should be removed, particularly for patients with normal serum marker in which residual disease is present on imaging after adjuvant therapy and for patients with immature teratoma, to avoid growing teratoma syndrome [III, A]. The role of secondary cytoreductive surgery for patients with recurrent or progressive ovarian GCT remains controversial.
Unlike males, females who have a relapse with malignant disease after primary ChT for GCTs have a poor prognosis.
The role of the new targeted agents in GCTs is yet to be dem- onstrated. Targeted agents already investigated in testicular tumours and of potential interest include tyrosine kinase inhibi- tors (imatinib and sunitinib) and anti-angiogenic agents (beva- cizumab) [44]. These recent studies involving targeted therapies have been inconclusive. Nevertheless, studies of the manage- ment of refractory GCTs are ongoing, with a focus on optimal utilisation of HDCT and ASCT, as well as the role of immune checkpoint inhibitors in refractory GCTs [45]. Studies aiming to identify the patients who may benefit from more intensive treatment up front to prevent the development of refractory dis- ease are also in progress for testicular GCTs, and the results may be useful for ovarian GCT patients [46].

Sex cord-stromal tumours
Debulking surgery, whenever feasible, remains the most effective treatment for metastatic or recurrent granulosa cell tumours [III,
 
A]. Platinum-based ChT is currently used for patients with advanced-stage SCSTs or recurrent disease, with an overall response rate of 63%–80% [47]. Unfortunately, most patients with advanced disease do not have durable remissions. Patients with advanced dis- ease have poor prognosis and they are, therefore, treated with adju- vant therapy, although the data are very limited [IV, C]. The BEP regimen for three cycles or carboplatin/paclitaxel for six cycles is cur- rently recommended for adjuvant postoperative ChT and for patients with recurrent SCSTs [III, A].
Patients with steroid cell tumours that are pleomorphic, large, at an advanced stage or with non-operable residual disease or with an increased mitotic count should be treated with addi- tional postoperative platinum-based ChT, either with BEP (if not previously used), or with a taxane-platinum combination [IV, C].
The GOG is currently conducting a randomised phase II trial of BEP versus the combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin for patients with newly diagnosed and ChT-na¨ıve recurrent meta- static SCSTs of the ovary [48].
Alternative ChT options include: PVB, EP, CAP, VAC and weekly paclitaxel for relapsed patients after platins. There are lim- ited data regarding the utility of ChT in patients with persistent SLCTs, but responses in patients with measurable disease have been reported [III, B].
Given the functional hormonal nature of granulosa cell tumours that express steroid hormone receptors, there is some rational for a hormone-based approach. Response to gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists, tamoxifen, progestin and aromatase inhibitors (AIs) has been reported. In a recent review, Van Meurs et al. reported the results of 31 patients treated with hormone therapy; a CR was described in 25.8% of patients and a partial response in 45.2% [49]. Despite limited available data, hormone therapy appears to be a useful alternative treatment for patients with advanced-stage or recurrent AGCTs [IV, B]. The role of AIs for relapsed granulosa cell tumours is being assessed in the multicentre phase II PARAGON trial (ANZGOG-0903).
Anti-angiogenic agents have also been investigated in patients with recurrent AGCT, due to the overexpression of vascular endothelial growth factor and vascularity of these tumours. A recent study at the MD Anderson Cancer Center seems to con- firm the potential activity of bevacizumab [response rate 17%, stable disease (SD) 77%] [50], although the study was conducted in only 36 patients [III, C]. The GINECO group (Groupe d’Investigateurs Nationaux pour les Etudes des Cancers de l’Ovaire) is currently conducting a phase II trial (ALIENOR- ENGOT-ov7/GINECO), to explore the clinical benefit of adding bevacizumab to weekly paclitaxel followed by bevacizumab as maintenance versus weekly paclitaxel followed by observation in patients with relapsed SCSTs [51].

Small cell carcinomas of the ovary hypercalcaemic type

For selected patients with bulky stage III disease or stage IV disease where primary debulking surgery is not considered to be achievable, the use of neoadjuvant ChT may be considered on an individual basis after discussion with the tumour board [IV, C].
 
A combination of a cisplatin and etoposide-based therapy is generally considered most appropriate [III, B] [22, 36]. As reported in early stage, HDCT for patients who underwent a CR (after surgery and/or ChT) with ASCT rescue has been proposed and is associated with better prognosis [II, C] [23, 34, 37]. Even with intensive regimens, prognosis remains dismal, and despite frequent initial responses to ChT, relapses are frequent and tend to be refractory to second-line ChT.
The management of relapsed disease is often very challenging, and prolonged remissions are never achieved with second-line ChT regimens usually used in small cell lung carcinomas. Several schedules have been reported including the combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and vincristine [V, B]. There are anecdotal reports on carboplatin and paclitaxel including dose-dense regimes, and topotecan has also shown some modest activity as in small cell lung cancers [V, C]. To date, no targeted therapies have been tested in SCCOHT. Second-line treatment is likely to achieve short remission rates, and beyond that, patients should be considered for phase I trials if they remain of good performance status.


  Follow-up, long-term implications and  

 
Response evaluation and follow-up programme for post-ChT
Germ cell tumours. The surveillance follow-up programme for patients not undergoing postoperative ChT has been detailed previously. For patients undergoing ChT, serum tumour markers (hCG, a-FP, LDH, CA 125 and inhibin B) can accurately correlate with tumour response during ChT [V, A]. A CT scan of the abdo- men, pelvis and chest (in case of suspected lung metastases) and pelvic ultrasound are the most common and useful imaging tech- niques to evaluate the response to ChT in patients with measura- ble disease [V, A]. Approximately 75% of GCT recurrences occur within the first year after initial management; the peritoneal cav- ity is the most common site of recurrence, while retroperitoneal lymph node involvement is very uncommon. Given that the majority of women with GCTs have an excellent survival outcome, persistence of long-term effects of treatment is highly significant. The most frequent side effects of BEP included pul- monary toxicity, decreased diffusing capacity of the lungs for car- bon monoxide (DLCO), acute myeloblastic leukaemia (AML), neuropathy, Raynaud’s disease, tinnitus, high tone hearing loss, gonadal dysfunction, cardiovascular disease/hypertension and nephrotoxicity (Table 6). One of the most ominous late effects of ChT, particularly for young survivors, is the risk of secondary malignancies. Contrary to what is known for testicular cancer survivors, no study so far has analysed the risk of a solid second cancer in GCTs. Recently, the Cancer Registry of Norway has reported the cumulative incidence of a second cancer in 10-year GCT survivors [19]. A second cancer was diagnosed in 23 of 139 survivors who underwent cytotoxic treatment. Interestingly, among these 23 cases, 18 had received abdominal RT and 16 of them had their second malignancy occur below the diaphragm. Three uterine tumours and two malignant melanomas occurred
 
among 41 patients treated only with ChT. Due to the low number of cases, the role of ChT in the development of second malignan- cies cannot be assessed.
Follow-up visits for GCT patients must include history, physi- cal and pelvic examinations and exploration of tumour markers every 3 months for the first 2 years, every 6 months during the third year and then yearly until progression [V, A]. Tumour marker exploration can be avoided from the third year.

Sex cord-stromal tumours. Conversely, SCSTs have an indolent course with tendency for late recurrence (the median time to relapse is approximately 4–6 years), therefore patients with SCSTs require long-term follow-up [47]. Several reports describe relapses occurring more than 20 years (up to 37 years) after diag- nosis. Common sites of recurrence are the upper abdomen (55%–70%) and the pelvis (30%–45%).
In the case of SCSTs, follow-up visits including physical exam and tumour marker exploration (e.g. inhibin B, AMH) must be carried out every 6 months starting from the third year and this frequency should be maintained indefinitely [V, B]. Pelvic ultra- sound should be carried out every 6 months in those patients who have undergone fertility-sparing surgery. CT scan or mag- netic resonance imaging (MRI) should be carried out when clini- cally indicated, based on symptoms or tumour marker elevation.
The use of PET scan for tumour response evaluation or follow- up is not well established yet, as this is not recommended in GCTs [V, D].

Fertility preservation in non-epithelial ovarian cancer. Fertility preservation should not jeopardise the oncological management. For non-epithelial ovarian cancer, much of the literature on fer- tility has been focused on young women who harbour GCTs.
GCTs account for less than 5% of all ovarian malignancies and are typically diagnosed in young females, at the peak of their reproductive age. After introduction of cisplatin-based ChT, most young women with GCTs treated according to the current therapeutic approach will survive the disease. However, this suc- cess must be balanced against possible treatment-associated long- term adverse effects, gonadal dysfunction being among the most feared. The likelihood of ChT-induced amenorrhoea is based on the specific administered ChT, its cumulative drug dose and duration of therapy. In general, cisplatin is viewed to be only moderately gonadotoxic; a significant association between increased cumulative doses of cisplatin-based ChT and reduced gonadal function has been shown in males with germ cell cancer [38]. Recently, the work published by Solheim et al. has shown a similar dose-dependent risk of gonadal dysfunction in females [19]. This group reports that the cumulative probability of achieving pregnancy after treatment was significantly higher in women who received no adjuvant treatment or no more than three cycles of cisplatin-based ChT compared with those who had
> 3 cycles of cisplatin- or non-cisplatin-based postoperative treatment. In addition, the fertility outcome, namely the return of menstruation and ovulation, depends on age: the younger
the patient, the larger the reserve of oocytes harvested after ChT [52]. The infertility rate reported among women attempting con- ception after treatment for GCTs is 5%–10% [26, 53] which is almost comparable to the rate among age-matched women in
 
the general population [54]. Nevertheless, oocyte cryopreserva- tion is an option for patients scheduled to receive ChT [V, C]. The recommended approach is to postpone cancer treatment to enable ovulation induction and oocyte aspiration. Whenever possible, the retrieved oocytes should be in vitro fertilised prior cryopreservation, with donor sperm offered to single patients [55]. These frozen embryos may be used to achieve pregnancies if ChT-related ovarian failures occur. Another approach is controlled ovarian hyperstimulation followed by oocyte cryopre- servation 12 months after the end of ChT, in the scenario of a rapid decline in ovarian reserve [V, C]. However, due to the rarity of GCTs, experience with this approach is limited.
There is an increasing evidence for efficacy in reducing prema- ture ovarian insufficiency with the use of GnRH agonists in patients with breast cancer undergoing ChT. However, there is no evidence in other cancers and certainly none in these rare diseases [56].

Hormone replacement therapy and contraception
ChT has long-term effects on gonadal function and may lead to ovarian dysfunction and sterility. Factors such as cumulative drug dose, duration of therapy and age at treatment influence the incidence of ovarian failure function. Those patients who suffer from iatrogenic menopause usually have more pronounced symptoms in comparison with those following a naturally occur- ring menopause, mainly due to the sudden cessation of ovarian hormone production and younger age. In this field, the GOG car- ried out an analysis evaluating the quality of life and the repro- ductive and psychosocial characteristics of survivors of GCTs compared with matched controls [57]. At a median follow-up of
10.2 years, these women appeared to be free of any major physical illnesses compared with matched controls. The only differences consisted of higher rates of reported hypertension, hypercholes- terolaemia and hearing loss. Among chronic functional prob- lems, numbness, tinnitus and Raynaud’s symptoms were reported more frequently by survivors. In spite of persistence of a few sequelae of treatment, in general, GCT survivors enjoy a healthy life comparable to that of controls.
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for germ cell and sex cord ovarian malignancies is important to consider; most cases occur in young premenopausal women who could enter the men- opause as a consequence of radical treatment and would be exposed to several decades of oestrogen deficiency. Symptoms of iatrogenic menopause are usually more pronounced compared with a regular menopause due to the sudden cessation of ovarian hormone production, younger age and additional physical and psychological symptoms associated with cancer therapy.
HRT is an effective treatment mainly used for the treatment of vasomotor symptoms, low mood, sexual dysfunction and uro- genital symptoms following the menopause. Moreover, it may dramatically improve physical and psychological symptoms and, in the end, the quality of life in cancer patients.
Although, there is no trial evaluating the use of HRT in germ cell and sex cord ovarian cancer patients, it is generally consid- ered that HRT may be used safely for GCTs [V, A]. In the case of ovarian granulosa cell tumours and other sex cord-stromal malignancies, e.g. SLCTs which are thought to be hormone
 
dependent, an HRT approach should be avoided following their diagnosis [V, D].
Hormonal contraception is not contraindicated for women diagnosed with GCTs receiving fertility-sparing treatment and wanting to postpone or avoid pregnancies [V, B].


 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development http://www.esmo.org/ Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The relevant litera- ture has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of rec- ommendations is presented in Table 7. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system presented in Table 8. Statements without grading were consid- ered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anony- mous peer review process.


 
IRC has reported advisory board membership for Roche, Clovis, AstraZeneca, Tesaro, PharmaMar, Amgen, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Vifor Pharma and has received research support from PharmaMar; DL has reported advisory board membership for Roche, Clovis, AstraZeneca and has received research support from PharmaMar; AO has reported advisory board membership for Roche, Clovis, AstraZeneca and PharmaMar; NC is a member of the Roche speakers’ bureau; PM, JP and PP have reported no conflicts of interest.

 
1.	Gatta G, van der Zwan JM, Casali PG et al. Rare cancers are not so rare: the rare cancer burden in Europe. Eur J Cancer 2011; 47: 2493–2511.
2.	Young RH, Oliva E, Scully RE. Small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hyper- calcemic type. A clinicopathological analysis of 150 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 1994; 18: 1102–1116.
3.	Prat J. Ovarian sex cord-stromal and steroid cell tumors (Chapter 28). In Mutter GL, Prat J (eds), Pathology of the Female Reproductive Tract, 3rd edition. Churchill Livingstone (Elsevier), Edinburgh 2014.
4.	Lane  AH,  Lee  MM,  Fuller  AF  Jr  et  al.  Diagnostic  utility  of  Mu¨llerian inhibiting substance determination in patients with primary and recur- rent granulosa cell tumors. Gynecol Oncol 1999; 73: 51–55.
5.	Gershenson DM. Current advances in the management of malignant germ cell and sex cord-stromal tumors of the ovary. Gynecol Oncol 2012; 125: 515–517.
6.	Prat J, Cao D, Carinelli S et al. Teratoma (Chapter 1: Tumours of the ovary). In Kurman RJ, Carcangiu ML, Herrington CS, Young RH (eds), WHO Classification of Tumours of Female Reproductive Organs, 4th edition. IARC: Lyon 2014; 57–62.
7.	Prat J, Cao D, Carinelli S et al. Monodermal teratomas and somatic-type tumours arising from a dermoid cyst (Chapter 1: Tumours of the ovary). In: Kurman RJ, Carcangiu ML, Herrington CS, Young RH (eds), WHO Classification of Tumours of Female Reproductive Organs, 4th edition. IARC: Lyon 2014; 63–66.
8.	O’Connor DM, Norris HJ. The influence of grade on the outcome of stage I ovarian immature (malignant) teratomas and the reproducibility of grading. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1994; 13: 283–289.
 
9.	Al-Agha OM, Huwait HF, Chow C et al. FOXL2 is a sensitive and specific marker for sex cord-stromal tumors of the ovary. Am J Surg Pathol 2011; 35: 484–494.
10.	Chang HM, Cheng JC, Taylor E, Leung PC. Oocyte-derived BMP15 but not GDF9 down-regulates connexin43 expression and decreases gap junction intercellular communication activity in immortalized human granulosa cells. Mol Hum Reprod 2014; 20: 373–383.
11.	Foulkes WD, Clarke BA, Hasselblatt M et al. No small surprise—small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcaemic type, is a malignant rhabdoid tumour. J Pathol 2014; 233: 209–214.
12.	Jelinic P, Mueller JJ, Olvera N et al. Recurrent SMARCA4 mutations in small cell carcinoma of the ovary. Nat Genet 2014; 46: 424–426.
13.	Ramos P, Karnezis AN, Craig DW et al. Small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcemic type, displays frequent inactivating germline and somatic mutations in SMARCA4. Nat Genet 2014; 46: 427–429.
14.	Karnezis AN, Wang Y, Ramos P et al. Dual loss of the SWI/SNF complex ATPases SMARCA4/BRG1 and SMARCA2/BRM is highly sensitive and specific for small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcaemic type. J Pathol 2016; 238: 389–400.
15.	Hasselblatt M, Gesk S, Oyen F et al. Nonsense mutation and inactivation of SMARCA4 (BRG1) in an atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor showing retained SMARCB1 (INI1) expression. Am J Surg Pathol 2011; 35: 933–935.
16.	Schneppenheim R, Fru¨hwald MC, Gesk S et al. Germline nonsense muta- tion and somatic inactivation of SMARCA4/BRG1 in a family with rhab- doid tumor predisposition syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 2010; 86: 279–284.
17.	Karanian-Philippe M, Velasco V, Longy M et al. SMARCA4 (BRG1) loss of expression is a useful marker for the diagnosis of ovarian small cell carcinoma of the hypercalcemic type (ovarian rhabdoid tumor): a com- prehensive analysis of 116 rare gynecologic tumors, 9 soft tissue tumors, and 9 melanomas. Am J Surg Pathol 2015; 39: 1197–1205.
18.	Prat J. FIGO Committee on Gynecologic Oncology. Staging classification for cancer of the ovary, fallopian tube, and peritoneum. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2014; 124: 1–5.
19.	Solheim O, Kærn J, Trope´ CG et al. Malignant ovarian germ cell tumors: presentation, survival and second cancer in a population based Norwegian cohort (1953-2009). Gynecol Oncol 2013; 131: 330–335.
20.	Mangili G, Sigismondi C, Gadducci A et al. Outcome and risk factors for recurrence in malignant ovarian germ cell tumors: a MITO-9 retrospec- tive study. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2011; 21: 1414–1421.
21.	de la Motte Rouge T, Pautier P, Genestie C et al. Prognostic significance of an early decline in serum alpha-fetoprotein during chemotherapy for ovarian yolk sac tumors. Gynecol Oncol 2016; 142: 452–457.
22.	Reed NS, Pautier P, Avall-Lundqvist E et al. Gynecologic Cancer InterGroup (GCIG)consensus review for ovarian small cell cancers. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2014; 24 (9 Suppl 3): S30–S34.
23.	Bristow RE, Tomacruz RS, Armstrong DK et al. Survival effect of maxi- mal cytoreductive surgery for advanced ovarian carcinoma during the platinum era: a meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 2002; 20: 1248–1259.
24.	Mangili G, Sigismondi C, Lorusso D et al. The role of staging and adju- vant chemotherapy in stage I malignant ovarian germ cell tumors (MOGTs): the MITO-9 study. Ann Oncol 2017; 28: 333–338.
25.	Billmire D, Vinocur C, Rescorla F et al. Outcome and staging evaluation in malignant germ cell tumors of the ovary in children and adolescents: an Intergroup study. J Pediatr Surg 2004; 39: 424–429.
26.	Matei D, Brown J, Frazier L. Updates in the management of ovarian germ cell tumors. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book 2013; e210.
27.	Low JJ, Perrin LC, Crandon AJ, Hacker NF. Conservative surgery to pre- serve ovarian function in patients with malignant ovarian germ cell tumors. A review of 74 cases. Cancer 2000; 89: 391–398.
28.	Brown J, Friedlander M, Backes FJ et al. Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup (GCIG) consensus review for ovarian germ cell tumors. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2014; 24(9 Suppl 3): S48–S54.
29.	Nasioudis D, Kanninen TT, Holcomb K et al. Prevalence of lymph node metastasis and prognostic significance of lymphadenectomy in apparent early-stage malignant ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors. Gynecol Oncol 2017; 145: 243–247.
 
30.	Billmire DF, Cullen JW, Rescorla FJ et al. Surveillance after initial surgery for pediatric and adolescent girls with stage I ovarian germ cell tumors: report from the Children’s Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 465–470.
31.	Dark GG, Bower M, Newlands ES et al. Surveillance policy for stage I ovarian germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 1997; 15: 620–624.
32.	Vazquez I, Rustin GJ. Current controversies in the management of germ cell ovarian tumours. Curr Opin Oncol 2013; 25: 539–545.
33.	Wilson MK, Fong P, Mesnage S et al. Stage I granulosa cell tumours: a management conundrum? Results of long-term follow up. Gynecol Oncol 2015; 138: 285–291.
34.	Brown J, Shvartsman HS, Deavers MT et al. The activity of taxanes in the treatment of sex cord-stromal ovarian tumors. J Clin Oncol 2004; 22: 3517–3523.
35.	Callegaro-Filho D, Gershenson DM, Nick AM et al. Small cell carcinoma of the ovary-hypercalcemic type (SCCOHT): a review of 47 cases. Gynecol Oncol 2016; 140: 53–57.
36.	Pautier P, Ribrag V, Duvillard P et al. Results of a prospective dose-
intensive regimen in 27 patients with small cell carcinoma of the ovary of the hypercalcemic type. Ann Oncol 2007; 18: 1985–1989.
37.	Witkowski L, Goudie C, Ramos P et al. The influence of clinical and
genetic factors on patient outcome in small cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcemic type. Gynecol Oncol 2016; 141: 454–460.
38.	Pectasides D, Pectasides E, Kassanos D. Germ cell tumors of the ovary. Cancer Treat Rev 2008; 34: 427–441.
39.	Williams SD. Current management of ovarian germ cell tumors. Oncology (Williston Park) 1994; 8: 53–60.
40.	Williams SD, Kauderer J, Burnett AF et al. Adjuvant therapy of com-
pletely resected dysgerminoma with carboplatin and etoposide: a trial of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Gynecol Oncol 2004; 95: 496–499.
41.	Loehrer PJ Sr, Lauer R, Roth BJ et al. Salvage therapy in reccurent germ cell cancer: ifosfamide and cisplatin plus either vinblastine or etoposide. Ann Intern Med 1988; 109: 540–546.
42.	Einhorn LH. Chemotherapeutic and surgical strategies for germ cell tumors. Chest Surg Clin N Am 2002; 12: 695–706.
43.	Reddy Ammakkanavar N, Matei D, Abonour R, Einhorn LH. High-dose chemotherapy for recurrent ovarian germ cell tumors. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 226–227.
44.	Manchana T, Ittiwut C, Mutirangura A, Kavanagh JJ. Targeted
therapies for rare gynaecological cancers. Lancet Oncol 2010; 11: 685–693.
45.	Chi EA, Schweizer MT. Durable response to immune checkpoint block- ade in a platinum-refractory patient with nonseminomatous germ cell tumor. Clin Genitourin Cancer 2017; 15: e855–e857.
46.	Allen JC, Kirschner A, Scarpato KR, Morgans AK. Current management of refractory germ cell tumors and future directions. Curr Oncol Rep 2017; 19: 8.
47.	Ray-Coquard I, Brown J, Harter P et al. Gynecologic Cancer InterGroup (GCIG) consensus review for ovarian sex cord stromal tumors. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2014; 24(9 Suppl 3): S42–S47.
48.	NCT01042522. https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT01042522 (9 February
2018, date last accessed).
49.	van Meurs HS, van Lonkhuijzen LR, Limpens J et al. Hormone therapy in ovarian granulosa cell tumors: a systematic review. Gynecol Oncol 2014; 134: 196–205.
50.	Brown J, Brady WE, Schink J et al. Efficacy and safety of bevacizumab in recurrent sex cord-stromal ovarian tumors: results of a phase 2 trial of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Cancer 2014; 120: 344–351.
51.	NCT01770301. https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT01770301 (12 March 2018, date last accessed).
52.	Gershenson DM. Treatment of ovarian cancer in young women. Clin
Obstet Gynecol 2012; 55: 65–74.
53.	Morice P, Pautier P, Fanchin R et al. Therapy Insight: fertility in women after cancer treatment. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab 2007; 3: 819–826.
 
54.	Tomao F, Peccatori F, Del Pup L et al. Special issues in fertility preser- vation for gynecologic malignancies. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2016; 97: 206–219.
55.	Tewari KS, Di Saia PJ. Ovulatory failure, fertility preservation and repro- ductive strategies in the setting of gynecologic and non-gynecologic malignancies. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol 2006; 27: 449–461.
56.	Lambertini M, Ceppi M, Poggio F et al. Ovarian suppression using lutei- nizing hormone-releasing hormone agonists during chemotherapy to
 
preserve ovarian function and fertility of breast cancer patients: a meta- analysis of randomized studies. Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 2408–2419.
57.	Champion V, Williams SD, Miller A et al. Quality of life in long-term survivors of ovarian germ cell tumors: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol 2007; 105: 687–694.
58.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
