




 SPECIAL ARTICLE	

Oesophageal cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up5
R. Obermannová1, M. Alsina2,3, A. Cervantes4,5, T. Leong6, F. Lordick7, M. Nilsson8,9, N. C. T. van Grieken10, A. Vogel11 &
E. C. Smyth12, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Comprehensive Cancer Care, Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic; 2Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario de Navarra (HUN), Pamplona; 3Gastrointestinal Tumours Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona; 4Department of Medical Oncology, INCLIVA Biomedical Research Institute, University of Valencia, Valencia; 5CIBERONC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; 6The Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia; 7Department of Medicine II (Oncology, Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Pulmonology and Infectious Diseases), University Cancer Center Leipzig (UCCL), Leipzig University Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany; 8Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm; 9Department of Upper Abdominal Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; 10Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 11Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany; 12Department of Oncology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK


Available online 29 July 2022




 
INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Oesophageal cancer is the seventh most common cancer worldwide, with 604 000 new cases diagnosed in 2020. It is the sixth most common cause of cancer-related mortality, with an estimated 544 000 deaths in 2020.1 Approximately 70% of oesophageal cancer diagnoses occur in men; there is a twofold to threefold difference in incidence and mortality rates between the sexes. Rates of oesophageal cancer are higher in developing versus developed countries for men, but are comparable for women.2 Eastern Asia exhibits the highest regional incidence, followed by Southern Africa, Eastern Africa, Northern Europe and South Central Asia.1 Recent data from the US Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database indicate an increased incidence of oesophageal adenocarcinoma (AC) in patients aged
<50 years. In addition, young patients tend to be diagnosed in more advanced stages.3
There are two main subtypes of oesophageal cancer: oesophageal squamous-cell carcinoma (SCC) and oesopha- geal AC. Although SCC accounts for w90% of cases of oesophageal cancer worldwide, the incidence of AC is rising and has surpassed the incidence rate of SCC in several


*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: September 2016, last update July 2022. This publication supersedes the previously published ver- siondAnn Oncol 2016;27(suppl 5):v50-v57.
0923-7534/© 2022 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 
regions of Europe and North America, as well as certain high-risk areas of Asia, where this change was preceded by economic development and dietary changes (e.g. in China).2 Heavy alcohol consumption, smoking and their synergis- tic effects are the major risk factors for oesophageal SCC in Western populations.4 In lower-income countries, including parts of Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, the major risk factors for oesophageal SCC have yet to be elucidated, although potential dietary components have been identified, including nutritional deficiencies and nitrosamines.5 Addi- tional suspected risk factors for oesophageal SCC are betel quid chewing in the Indian subcontinent, consumption of pickled vegetables (e.g. in China) and consumption of food and beverages at very hot temperatures (e.g. in Uruguay,
Iran and Tanzania).4
AC represents roughly two-thirds of oesophageal cancer cases in high-income countries, with excess body weight, gastroesophageal reﬂux disease and oesophageal intestinal metaplasia among the key risk factors.4,6,7 Across high- income countries, incidence rates of oesophageal AC are thus rising, partly due to the increasing prevalence of excess body weight and gastroesophageal reﬂux disease, and possibly because of decreasing incidence of chronic Heli- cobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection,8 which has been inversely associated with oesophageal AC.9 These trends are predicted to continue in the near future, with incidence of oesophageal AC surpassing SCC in many high-income countries.
Finally, the incidence of oesophagogastric junction (OGJ) AC seems to have moderately increased during recent decades, although this has not been uniformly classified.10 Similar to oesophageal AC, obesity, gastroesophageal
 

 
reﬂux disease and a high fat intake are risk factors for OGJ cancer,7 and H. pylori infection is inversely related.8

DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Diagnosis
Screening for precursor lesions (oesophageal intestinal metaplasia) in high-risk patients, surveillance and endo- scopic ablation of precursor lesions are not discussed in this guideline. The guidelines of the American College of Gastroenterology should be followed.11
The recommended diagnostic and staging investigations are detailed in Table 1. All patients with new dysphagia, gastrointestinal bleeding, recurrent aspiration or emesis and weight loss and/or loss of appetite should undergo an upper intestinal endoscopy. Approximately three-quarters of all oesophageal ACs are located in the distal oesoph- agus, whereas SCCs occur more frequently in the proximal- to-middle oesophagus.12 Biopsies should be taken from all suspicious areas. There is limited evidence for the optimal number of biopsies required to ensure a diagnosis where malignancy is present. The accepted convention is to obtain 6-8 representative biopsies of the lesion. The number of biopsies should be sufficient for pathological and molecular
analysis.


Pathology
Diagnosis should be based on endoscopic biopsies with the histological tumour type classified according to the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria.13 The differentiation


Table 1. Diagnostic and staging investigations in oesophageal cancer
Procedure	Purpose
FBC	Assess for iron-deficiency anaemia
Renal and liver function	Assess renal and liver function to determine appropriate therapeutic options
Endoscopy and biopsy	Obtain tissue for diagnosis, histological classification and molecular biomarkers,
e.g. PD-L1 and HER2 status (AC)
EUS	Accurate assessment of T and N stage in potentially resectable tumours
Bronchoscopy with endobronchial Assess tumour growth towards central ultrasonography	airways; complementary to EUS,
especially when tumour stricture
precludes EUS
CT of thorax þ abdomen
  pelvis	Staging of tumour to detect local/ distant lymphadenopathy and metastatic disease
PETeCT, if available	Staging of tumour to detect local/ distant lymphadenopathy and metastatic disease
Laparoscopy    washings	Exclude occult metastatic disease involving peritoneum/diaphragm, especially in locally advanced (T3/T4) ACs of the OGJ infiltrating the anatomical cardia
AC, adenocarcinoma; CT, computed tomography; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; FBC, full blood count; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; N, node; OGJ, oesophagogastric junction; PD-L1, programmed death-ligand 1; PET, positron emis- sion tomography; T, tumour.

 
 
between oesophageal SCC and AC is of prognostic and therapeutic relevance.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining is recommended in poorly differentiated and undifferentiated cancers [grade 3/4 American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)/Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) 8th Edition] when dif- ferentiation between SCC and AC using morphological characteristics is not possible. In addition, other less frequently occurring tumour types, such as neuroendocrine tumours/carcinomas, lymphomas, mesenchymal tumours, melanomas or secondary tumours, must be identified separately from SCC and AC.
Molecular pathology
The Cancer Genome Atlas research network identified three subtypes of oesophageal SCC (oesophageal SCC1, oeso- phageal SCC2 and oesophageal SCC3), which are each associated with defects in specific molecular pathways.14 So far, no distinct therapeutic options for these subtypes are available.
Patients with oesophageal SCC have been shown to benefit from programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) blockade.15-23 In patients who are candidates to receive first-line treat- ment with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) IHC is recommended [see the table of ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets (ESCAT) scores for further details; Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.003]. PD-L1 expression is measured using tumour proportion score (TPS), which evaluates the percentage of viable tumour cells showing partial or complete membrane staining at any in- tensity (PD-L1 positivity is defined as TPS	1% in the case of first-line treatment with nivolumab and nivolumabeipili- mumab), or combined positive score (CPS), which is calcu- lated by the total number of cells with PD-L1-positive plasma membrane staining (including tumour cells, lymphocytes and macrophages) divided by the number of vital tumour cells, multiplied by 100 (PD-L1 positivity is defined as CPS	10 in the case of first-line treatment with pembrolizumab). In the CheckMate 648 study, TPS was determined using the PD-L1 IHC 28-8 pharmDx assay, while in KEYNOTE-590, the PD-L1 IHC 22C3 assay was used for CPS. In several tumour types, the analytical concordance between the two assays has shown to be high, although conﬂicting data also exist.24,25 Currently, data on their interchangeability specifically in oesophageal SCC are awaited. Use of a validated test that is subject to a quality assurance programme is recommended. In the RATIONALE 302 study, PD-L1 expression was assessed using the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP 263) assay with tumour area positivity (TAP) score. TAP is defined as the total percentage of the tumour area covered by tumour cells with any membrane staining above the background and tumour-associated immune cells with any staining above the background. Only patients with a TAP score		10
were defined as PD-L1 positive.23
Molecular pathology assessment in oesophageal and OGJ AC should follow the recommendations provided in the ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) for gastric cancer.26
 

 
Recommendations
Patients with new dysphagia, gastrointestinal bleeding, recurrent aspiration or emesis and weight loss and/or loss of appetite should undergo an upper intestinal endos- copy [III, A]. Diagnosis should be made by histopatholog- ical assessment of multiple ( 6) endoscopic biopsies to guarantee an adequate representation of the tumour and sufficient tissue for molecular analysis [I, B].
Histological diagnosis should be reported according to the WHO criteria [IV, A].
IHC staining is recommended in poorly differentiated and undifferentiated cancers when differentiation between SCC and AC using morphological characteristics is not possible [V, B].
For oesophageal SCC, PD-L1 expression by IHC according to the TPS or CPS is a validated predictive biomarker for ICI therapy [I-II, A].


STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Decisions about initial treatment for oesophageal cancer are based on clinical staging, which should be carried out with the highest degree of accuracy possible. Staging should include a complete clinical examination, endoscopy and computed tomography (CT) or positron emission tomography (PET) with [18F]2-ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG). Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) can be used for tumour (T) and node (N) staging, but has low accuracy for T1 tumours; in these cases, endoscopic resection offers more precise staging in addition to therapeutic benefit.27,28
EUS is particularly useful to determine the therapeutic strategy in two ways: (i) for assessment of T4b status with invasion towards the airways, pericardium or aorta, and (ii) for identification and biopsy of suspected lymph node metastases outside the regular radiation field or beyond the planned resection limits. In advanced T stages, tumour stricture may preclude the use of EUS. In the assessment of tumour growth towards central airways, bronchoscopy with endobronchial ultrasonography is a useful complement to EUS, especially when tumour stricture precludes EUS use.
FDGePET (typically carried out as PETeCT) is helpful to identify otherwise undetected distant metastases. FDGe PET should therefore be carried out in patients who are candidates for oesophagectomy, as the finding of otherwise unknown distant metastases can help to avoid futile sur- gery; however, the availability of PETeCT differs between countries and centres.29-32
Oesophageal SCCs are often accompanied by head and neck second primary tumours (HNSPTs). The prognosis of patients with an additional HNSPT is worse than patients with only oesophageal SCC. The pooled prevalence of HNSPT in patients with oesophageal SCC is 6.7%. Therefore, early detection of HNSPTs may improve the overall outcome of patients with oesophageal SCC.33 Patients with oeso- phageal SCC should undergo a qualified clinical examination of the head and neck region to exclude HNSPTs.
 
In locally advanced (T3/T4) ACs of the OGJ infiltrating the anatomical cardia, laparoscopy should be carried out to rule out peritoneal metastases, which are found in w15% of patients.34 The finding of otherwise unknown peritoneal metastases may prevent patients from undergoing futile surgery.
Oesophageal cancer should be staged according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer AJCC/UICC TNM (tumourenodeemetastasis) 8th edition staging system (see Supplementary Tables S2 and S3, available at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.003).35 Anatomic staging should be complemented by medical risk assessment, especially in patients who are scheduled for multimodal therapy and/or surgery. Medical risk assessment should comprise a differential blood count as well as liver, pul- monary, cardiac and renal function tests.
Nutritional status and history of weight loss should be assessed according to the European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism (ESPEN) guidelines.36 More than half of patients lose >5% of their body weight before
admission for oesophagectomy, and 40% lose >10%. Inde-
pendent from body mass index, weight loss confers an
increased operative risk, worsens a patient’s quality of life (QoL) and is associated with poor survival in advanced disease. Therefore, nutritional support according to the ESPEN guidelines37 is an integral part of medical care for patients with oesophageal cancer, in both curative and palliative settings.
Reduced physical activity is associated with worse out- comes following perioperative treatment. In addition, lower physical fitness is a negative predictor of long-term survival in oesophagogastric cancer.38,39 A supervised exercise pro- gramme has been shown to improve cardiorespiratory fitness and aspects of QoL in patients who have undergone an oesophagectomy and can therefore be recommended.40 Other studies are investigating whether the addition of a perioperative exercise regimen to neoadjuvant chemo- therapy (ChT) improves outcomes.41 Geriatric screening and assessment may help to identify patients who need addi- tional support and/or are at increased risk of ChT-associated side-effects.42


Recommendations
Initial staging and risk assessment should include phys- ical examination, endoscopy and contrast-enhanced CT or FDGePETeCT scan of the thorax, abdomen pelvis. EUS can be used for T and N staging [III, A].
FDGePET should be carried out in candidates for oeso-
phagectomy [III, B].
In locally advanced (T3/T4) ACs of the OGJ which cross the diaphragm to infiltrate the anatomical cardia, lapa- roscopy should be carried out [IV, B].
The TNM stage should be recorded according to the lat- est edition of the AJCC/UICC guidelines and staging manual [IV, A].
 

 
Nutritional status and history of weight loss should be assessed [III, A] and nutritional support provided [II, A] according to ESPEN guidelines.


MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL AND LOCOREGIONAL DISEASES
Multidisciplinary assessment and planning of treatment are mandatory.Treatment is determined together with the patient based on histological subtype, clinical TNM stage, tumour
 
location and the patient’s predicted treatment tolerance, which considers performance status and comorbidities, and may be supplemented by functional testing. Correction of malnutrition is often warranted before curative-intent therapy can be started. Occasionally, enteral feeding is necessary, either via feeding jejunostomy or via nasogastric tube. Endo- scopic stenting should be avoided in patients undergoing treatment with curative intent as this may worsen prognosis.43 A proposed algorithm for the treatment of localised oeso- phageal and OGJ cancer is shown in Figure 1.
 



 
Figure 1. Treatment algorithm for local/locoregional resectable oesophageal and OGJ cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratification; red: surgery; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments; white: other aspects of management.
AC, adenocarcinoma; ChT, chemotherapy; CRT, chemoradiotherapy; cTNM, clinical tumourenodeemetastasis; EMA, European Medicines Agency; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; FDGePET, [18F]2-ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucoseepositron emission tomography; FLOT, 5-ﬂuorouracileleucovorineoxali- platinedocetaxel; GoR, grade of recommendation; LoE, level of evidence; MCBS, Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Score; MS-CT, multislice-computed tomography; OGJ, oesophagogastric junction; OS, overall survival; RT, radiotherapy; SCC, squamous-cell carcinoma.
aCriteria for endoscopic instead of surgical resection are specified in the text.
bFor patients unable or unwilling to undergo surgery, combined CRT is superior to RT alone.
cEvidence suggests that neoadjuvant CRT followed by surgery and definitive CRT is equally effective with regard to OS. Oesophageal surgery should be carried out in experienced (high-volume) centres only. For patients not willing to undergo oesophageal surgery or who are medically unfit for major surgery, definitive CRT should be preferred. Even many experienced centres prefer definitive CRT for oesophageal tumours with a very proximal/cervical location.
dSufficient evidence supports the use of perioperative ChT as well as neoadjuvant CRT. Both standards can be recommended with an equal LoE/GoR [I, A]. Several ongoing studies in Europe are comparing both modalities. Inclusion of patients in one of these studies is encouraged. Some centres prefer neoadjuvant CRT for tumours of the oesophagus and OGJ type I or II according to Siewert’s classification, while they use perioperative ChT for OGJ type III or II, but this is only a pragmatic solution not currently supported by scientific evidence.
eESMO-MCBS v1.191 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
fThis is optional in the case of incomplete response to CRT or local relapse and should only be carried out in selected patients and experienced centres [IV, C].
gWith residual vital tumour in the resection specimen.
 

 
Early disease (cT1 N0 M0)
Endoscopic en bloc resection, using either endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) or endoscopic submucosal dissec- tion (ESD), is the treatment of choice for lesions with intra- epithelial high-grade dysplasia and most T1 tumours.44,45 Examination of the specimen provides accurate staging and, unless the deep resection margin is involved or there are significant risk factors for lymph node metastases, endo- scopic resection can be considered definitive treatment.44,45 The strongest risk factors for lymph node metastasis are depth of invasion, lymphovascular invasion, low differentia- tion grade, ulceration and large tumour size.46,47
For oesophageal AC, which often occurs in the context of oesophageal intestinal metaplasia, endoscopic resection can usually be considered curative in all T1a cancers and, in the absence of other risk factors for lymph node metastasis, also in the most superficial submucosally involved T1b cancers (sm1, invasion depth <500 mm, no ulceration).45 For AC there is no evidence favouring either EMR or ESD, but EMR should normally be preferred in small lesions, while ESD should be considered in lesions >15 mm, poorly lifting tumours and tumours at risk of submucosal invasion.46
The risk of lymph node metastasis is generally higher with oesophageal SCC than with AC and even deep intramucosal T1a cancers (m3) need additional treatment if other risk factors are also present.47 Studies from Asia show that ESD results in a higher proportion of complete resection and a lower risk of local recurrence compared with EMR.48
For both histological subtypes, patients with involved deep endoscopic resection margins or significant risk factors for lymph node metastases should be offered further resective surgery with appropriate lymphadenectomy; however, che- moradiotherapy (CRT) could be considered as a treatment option for stage IA SCC with organ preservation.49

Locally advanced resectable disease (cT2-T4 or cN1-3 M0)
Surgery. Surgery is still the backbone of curative-intent treatment for both histological subtypes of locally advanced resectable oesophageal cancer (cT2-T4a or cN1-3), although definitive CRT with surveillance and salvage oeso- phagectomy when needed for local tumour control is also a recommended option, even in upfront resectable cases of oesophageal SCC (see the ‘Definitive CRT’ subsection for further information). Radical transthoracic oesophagectomy with en bloc two-field lymphadenectomy is the procedure of choice in fit patients. For distal tumours, abdominal and right chest access is used, and reconstruction is carried out with a gastric tube conduit with oesophagogastric anastomosis in the upper mediastinum (Ivor Lewis procedure). For mid and upper oesophageal tumours, abdominal, right chest and cervical access is used with a similar reconstruction to the cervical oesophagus (McKeown procedure). In frail patients with distal tumours, transhiatal oesophagectomy without transthoracic access can be carried out with lower morbidity, at the cost of less extensive lymphadenectomy.50
Minimally invasive oesophagectomy (MIO) techniques, including robotics, have become increasingly implemented
 
into clinical practice in recent years. Three randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing MIO with open oeso- phagectomy reported lower post-operative morbidity, quicker functional recovery and better QoL up to 1 year after surgery with MIO.51-54 Regarding oncological end- points such as free resection margins, lymph node yield and survival, the outcomes seem at least noninferior to open oesophagectomy.51,53,54 Recently, a population-based cohort study from Sweden and Finland reported better long-term overall survival (OS) after MIO compared with open oesophagectomy.55 In experienced centres, MIO is recommended as the surgical approach of choice.

Pre- and perioperative treatment. Pre- and perioperative treatment using ChT or CRT has been shown to increase rates of resection with no tumour at the margin (R0) and survival rates in oesophageal cancer, and should be considered in all patients with locally advanced resectable disease.56-62 The caveat to this recommendation is for cT2 N0 tumours, for which there is controversy regarding the need for preoperative treatment, as randomised trials have included low patient numbers from this population56,57,59 and retrospective studies have reported conﬂicting re- sults.63,64 A randomised phase III trial in stage I-II oeso- phageal cancer showed that preoperative CRT did not improve R0 resection rate or survival but increased post- operative mortality65; however, the patient cohort was heterogeneous and included cT1-T3 tumours; as such, the effect on the cT2 N0 subset is unknown. There is currently insufficient evidence to make firm recommendations regarding the use of preoperative treatment in cT2 N0 tu- mours. Each case should be discussed by the multidisci- plinary team with careful consideration of the potential risks and benefits.
The treatment paradigms for oesophageal SCC versus oesophageal AC have taken divergent paths due to the results of randomised phase III trials in the two histological subtypes, and the differing response of SCC and AC to CRT.
SCC. Based on the results of the Chemoradiotherapy for Oesophageal Cancer Followed by Surgery Study (CROSS),59 preoperative CRT can be recommended as a standard of care for SCC of the oesophagus. Weekly carboplatine paclitaxel combined with radiation to a dose of 41.4 Gy in 23 fractions followed by oesophagectomy showed improved survival compared with surgery alone for both SCC and AC. Treatment-related toxicity was acceptable and there was no increase in surgical morbidity or mortality. In particular, the 5-year OS rate of >60% for SCC in the trimodality arm was
substantially higher than those previously reported in
studies of surgery alone or definitive CRT.
Given the high response rates of oesophageal SCC to CRT,59 an alternative curative-intent treatment is definitive CRT with the option of salvage oesophagectomy in selected cases.66-68 This treatment was pioneered by the phase III Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 85-01 study in the early 1990s using the combination of cisplatin and 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) with radiotherapy (RT).66 A recent randomised phase
 

 
III trial of definitive CRT incorporating modern techniques of RT planning and delivery has reported encouraging results with a 3-year OS rate of 47.8% and median OS of 35.9 months in patients with oesophageal SCC.69 The use of definitive CRT is further supported by two prospective, randomised trials that showed equivalent OS following definitive CRT without surgery compared with preoperative CRT followed by sur- gery, although the non-operative strategy was associated with higher local recurrence rates.70,71 It is important to note that the aforementioned studies of definitive CRT did not systematically incorporate salvage oesophagectomy in pa- tients with incomplete clinical response, thereby failing to achieve the level of survival reported in CROSS. The use of salvage oesophagectomy in patients with persistent disease has been shown to be safe and associated with survival rates similar to those observed with preoperative CRT and planned surgery.67,68
Therefore, preoperative CRT followed by surgery or definitive CRT with close surveillance and salvage surgery for local tumour persistence or progression can be consid- ered the recommended definitive treatments for locally advanced SCC of the oesophagus; however, there are currently no data comparing these two treatment strate- gies. Definitive CRT is recommended for cervically localised tumours where surgery would entail a laryngectomy.
AC. Based on the results of CROSS,59 preoperative CRT can be recommended as one standard of care for locally advanced AC of the oesophagus and OGJ.
Several large prospective RCTs have established pre- and perioperative ChT as another standard of care for locally advanced AC of the oesophagus and OGJ.58,60-62 The benefit of perioperative ChT was initially demonstrated in the phase III MAGIC trial using a regimen of three preoperative and three post-operative cycles of epirubicinecisplatine5-FU (ECF), which resulted in tumour downstaging, improved R0 resection rate and improved survival compared with surgery alone.60 The phase II/III FLOT4-AIO trial compared perioperative ECF with four preoperative and four post- operative cycles of 5-FUeleucovorineoxaliplatinedoce- taxel (FLOT), and showed an OS benefit for FLOT.62 FLOT is therefore the preferred perioperative regimen for patients able to tolerate the treatment.
Direct comparisons of ChT versus CRT were previously limited; however, in 2021, results from the phase III Neo- AEGIS trial were presented in abstract form.72 Neo-AEGIS compared two standard regimens in the perioperative setting, with enrolled patients receiving either preoperative CRT (CROSS regimen) or perioperative ChT (MAGIC trial ECF regimen or FLOT). Preliminary results showed higher rates of tumour regression and pathological complete response in the CRT arm. No OS difference was observed between the two treatments; however, the majority of patients in the ChT arm were treated with the older ECF regimen rather than FLOT, and higher efficacy is expected with the perioperative FLOT regimen. Data from the phase III ESOPEC trial, which is comparing the CROSS CRT regimen with FLOT, are awaited.73
 
Even after complete clinical tumour response to preopera- tive CRTor ChT, patients with resectable oesophageal AC should proceed to surgery, as data for a watch-and-wait strategy following complete clinical remission are currently limited.
Adjuvant nivolumab following trimodality therapy. The phase III CheckMate 577 trial evaluated the addition of 1 year of adjuvant treatment with the anti-PD-1 antibody nivolumab after surgery in patients with SCC or AC of the oesophagus, including OGJ cancer, who had received neoadjuvant CRT and had evidence of residual pathological disease in the resection specimen (  ypT1 and/or   ypN1).18 The study demonstrated a significant improvement in disease-free survival for patients treated with adjuvant nivolumab (22.4 months) compared with placebo [11.0 months; hazard ratio (HR) for disease recurrence or death 0.69; 96.4% confidence interval
(CI) 0.56-0.86; P < 0.001]. Therefore adjuvant nivolumab is now recommended in this indication. PD-L1 testing is not
required for this indication.
Deﬁnitive CRT. As described above, definitive CRT (with close surveillance and salvage surgery) is a recommended option for resectable oesophageal SCC. In addition, definitive CRTshould be considered for patients with oesophageal SCC or AC who are unable or unwilling to undergo surgery.66,69 The traditional standard regimen for definitive CRT is four cycles of cisplatine 5-FU (or capecitabine) combined with RT to a dose of 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions (or 50 Gy in 25 fractions).66 Alternatively, six cycles of folinic acide5-FUeoxaliplatin (FOLFOX) can be considered.74 In recent years, weekly carboplatinepaclitaxel, as used in the CROSS regimen, has been combined with RT as definitive treatment. Although this regimen has not been directly compared with cisplatine5-FU in a randomised phase III trial, it is commonly utilised due to its favourable toxicity profile. Retrospective comparative studies have reported equivalent efficacy between different regimens.75 As a mini- mum requirement, RTshould be delivered using 3D conformal RT, but intensity modulated RT or volumetric arc therapy are preferred to better minimise the radiation dose to critical normal tissues. Currently there is little evidence to support the use of RT doses >50.4 Gy in the definitive treatment of
oesophageal cancer. Randomised phase III trials evaluating RT
dose escalation have not demonstrated improved local control or survival with RT doses >50.4 Gy.76,77 This is of importance if salvage oesophagectomy is considered as a therapeutic strategy, because doses >55 Gy have been associated with increased post-operative mortality and morbidity.67

Recommendations
Multidisciplinary assessment and planning before any treatment is mandatory [IV, A].
In experienced centres, MIO is the surgical approach of choice [II, A].
Endoscopic en bloc resection, using either EMR or ESD, is preferred for lesions with intraepithelial high-grade dysplasia and most T1 tumours [III, A].
 

 
Figure 2. Treatment algorithm for advanced oesophageal SCC.a
Purple: general categories or stratification; blue: systemic anticancer therapy. AC, adenocarcinoma; ChT, chemotherapy; CPG, Clinical Practice Guideline; CPS, combined positive score; EMA, European Medicines Agency; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; MCBS, Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Score; OGJ, oesophagogastric junction; PD- L1, programmed death-ligand 1; SCC, squamous-cell carcinoma; TPS, tumour proportion score.
aFor treatment of oesophageal AC and OGJ cancer, see the ESMO CPG for gastric cancer.26
bEMA approval is for tumours with PD-L1 CPS    10, FDA approval is irrespective of PD-L1 expression.
cESMO-MCBS v1.191 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).


 
For both histological subtypes, patients with involved deep endoscopic resection margins or significant risk factors for lymph node metastases should be offered further resec- tive surgery with appropriate lymphadenectomy [III, A]. Pre- and perioperative ChTor CRT should be considered in all patients with locally advanced resectable disease [I, A].
 
Locally advanced oesophageal SCC should be treated with CRT followed by surgery [I, A] or definitive CRT with close surveillance and salvage surgery for local tumour persistence or progression [II, B]. Definitive CRT is recommended for cervically localised tumours where surgery would entail a laryngectomy [III, B].
 

 
Preoperative CRT or pre- and perioperative ChT can be recommended as standards of care for locally advanced AC of the oesophagus and OGJ [I, A].
●	Patients with resectable, locally advanced oesophageal
 
The phase III KEYNOTE-590 trial evaluated addition of the anti-PD-1 antibody pembrolizumab to cisplatine5-FU in patients with untreated, advanced oesophageal or OGJ (Siewert type I) cancer.16 Patients with both SCC and AC
 
AC or OGJ cancer should be treated with neoadjuvant CRT based on the CROSS regimen or perioperative ChT (FLOT) followed by surgery [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: A].
Even after complete clinical tumour response to preoper- ative CRT or ChT, patients with resectable oesophageal or OGJ cancer should proceed to surgery as data for a watch-and-wait strategy are limited [IV, C].
Patients with SCC or AC of the oesophagus including OGJ cancer who have undergone neoadjuvant CRT and show evidence of residual pathological disease in the resection specimen ( ypT1 and/or ypN1) should be treated with adjuvant nivolumab [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: A].
●	Treatment with definitive CRT is recommended for pa-
 
histology were eligible, but the majority (73%) had SCC. The greatest OS gain was observed in patients with SCC and elevated PD-L1 expression (CPS 10; HR 0.57, 95% CI 0.43- 0.75; P < 0.0001), but modest improvements were also demonstrated in (i) all patients with a CPS   10 (HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.49-0.78; P < 0.0001); (ii) all patients with SCC (HR 0.72, 95% CI 0.60-0.88; P 0.0006) and (iii) all randomised patients (HR 0.73, 95% CI 0.62-0.86; P < 0.0001). A post hoc analysis suggested no benefit in patients with a PD-L1 CPS
<10. The phase III CheckMate 648 study randomised patients with treatment-naive advanced oesophageal SCC to (i) cisplatine5-FU; (ii) nivolumabecisplatine5-FU or (iii) nivolumab plus the anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (anti-CTLA-4) antibody ipilimumab.22 Patients
 
tients with SCC or AC of the oesophagus that is unresect- able and locally advanced or those who are unable or unwilling to undergo surgery [I, A].

MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED AND METASTATIC DISEASE
Patients with oesophageal cancer that is metastatic or unresectable and cannot be treated with curative-intent CRT have a poor prognosis; survival in clinical trials has historically been <1 year78; however, the use of ICIs with ChT has recently improved survival for this patient group.16,79
Treatment of advanced AC of the oesophagus and OGJ should be in line with the ESMO CPG for gastric cancer.26 A proposed algorithm for the treatment of advanced oeso- phageal SCC is shown in Figure 2.

First-line ChT for oesophageal SCC
Standard first-line ChT for oesophageal SCC is a platinume ﬂuoropyrimidine doublet. Most randomised trials have been conducted in oesophageal AC and data are extrapo- lated to SCC; however, multiple phase II studies support platinumeﬂuoropyrimidine treatment in an SCC popula- tion.80-82 Data from trials in locoregionally advanced oeso- phageal SCC suggest equivalence for cisplatin- and oxaliplatin-based regimens.74 The phase III GO2 trial recruited patients with advanced gastroesophageal cancer, including oesophageal SCC, who were unsuitable for full- dose ChT due to advanced age or frailty, and demon- strated equivalent outcomes and reduced toxicity with dose-reduced oxaliplatinecapecitabine.83

First-line ChT plus ICIs or ICIs without ChT for oesophageal SCC
Oesophageal SCC appears to be modestly more sensitive to ICIs than oesophageal AC based on the efficacy of anti-PD-1 antibody monotherapy.17,84 Nevertheless, benefit from ICI therapy is enhanced in both oesophageal SCC and AC tu- mours with elevated levels of PD-L1 expression using the CPS.15,16
 
treated with nivolumabeChT had improved OS compared
with patients treated with ChT alone; this benefit was most pronounced in patients with tumour cells expressing PD-L1 1% using TPS (HR 0.54, 99.5% CI 0.37-0.80; P < 0.001).
Nivolumabeipilimumab improved OS compared with ChT
alone in CheckMate 648; however, a lower radiological response rate was noted for nivolumabeipilimumab compared with ChT alone or nivolumabeChT, and there is a risk of early progression and death for patients treated without ChT, resulting in a lower grade of recommendation compared with nivolumabeChT. Finally, in the phase III ESCORT-1st trial, Chinese patients with untreated advanced oesophageal SCC were randomised to receive carboplatine paclitaxel with or without the anti-PD-1 antibody camreli- zumab.20 ESCORT-1st demonstrated an improvement in progression-free survival and OS for patients with oeso- phageal SCC treated with camrelizumabeChT.

Second and subsequent lines of treatment for oesophageal SCC
For patients with oesophageal SCC, second-line nivolumab monotherapy is an option based on the results of the phase III ATTRACTION-3 trial.17 In this study, predominantly Asian patients with SCC previously treated with platinume ﬂuoropyrimidine were randomised to receive either nivolu- mab or taxane-based ChT. Response rates were comparable between the two arms; however, nivolumab was associated with improved OS compared with ChT (HR 0.77, 95% CI 0.62- 0.96; P 0.019). Treatment outcomes were not affected by PD-L1 expression assessed on tumour cells; assessment of PD-L1 using CPS has not been reported. Similar results were observed with tislelizumab in the global phase III RATIONALE 302 study.23 Where approved, pembrolizumab may be an option for patients with previously treated SCC with PD-L1 CPS 10 based on the results of the phase III KEYNOTE-181 trial, which compared pembrolizumab monotherapy with ChT in previously treated oesophageal AC and SCC (patients who received first-line treatment with an ICI were not included).15 An OS benefit was only observed in patients with
 

 
SCC and a CPS 10. Following second-line treatment, patients with oesophageal SCC might be considered for ChT with a taxane or irinotecan.85-87

Supportive care and nutrition
Supportive care for patients with advanced oesophageal cancer should follow the recommendations provided in the ESMO CPG for gastric cancer,26 including early palliative care referral and nutritional support.

Recommendations
First-line treatment for advanced oesophageal SCC
First-line ChT with a platinum and ﬂuoropyrimidine is recommended as a standard treatment for advanced untreated oesophageal SCC [II, A]. Dose-reduced oxaliplatinecapecitabine is an alternative option for patients who are unsuitable for full-dose ChT [I, A].
PembrolizumabeChT is recommended for advanced, un- treated oesophageal SCC. The greatest benefit is seen in patients with a PD-L1 CPS 10 [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; European Medicines Agency (EMA) approval is for tumours with PD-L1 CPS 10, Food and Drug Adminis- tration (FDA) approval is irrespective of PD-L1 expression]. NivolumabeChT is recommended in patients with tumours expressing PD-L1 with a TPS 1% [I, A; ESMO- MCBS v1.1 score: 4]. Nivolumabeipilimumab can be given, but a lower radiological response rate and increased risk of early progression and death in patients treated without ChT needs to be considered [I, B; ESMO- MCBS v1.1 score: 4].
Second and subsequent lines of treatment for advanced oesophageal SCC
Nivolumab is recommended for oesophageal SCC previ- ously treated with platinumeﬂuoropyrimidine ChT [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
Where approved, pembrolizumab may be an option for patients with previously treated SCC who have not received first-line treatment with ICIs and have a PD-L1 CPS 10 [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; FDA approved, not EMA approved].
ChT with a taxane or irinotecan can be considered in fit patients who have been previously treated with platinumeﬂuoropyrimidine and/or nivolumab or pembrolizumab [II, B].

Supportive care and nutrition
Care for patients with advanced oesophageal cancer should include early palliative care referral and nutri- tional support [I, A].


FOLLOW-UP, LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND SURVIVORSHIP
Surveillance strategies after successful therapy for oeso- phageal and OGJ cancers remain controversial. Although the majority (w90%) of relapses occur within the first
 
2 years after completion of local therapy, potentially treatable relapses have been reported >5 years after local therapy.88,89 Metachronous malignancies should also be considered in long-term survivors.
Except for those patients who may be potential candi- dates for an endoscopic reintervention or early ‘salvage surgery’ after (failing) endoscopic resection or definitive CRT, there is no evidence that regular follow-up after initial therapy has an impact on survival.
Therefore follow-up visits should concentrate on symp- toms, nutrition and psychosocial support. A multidisci- plinary team is often required during the follow-up phase, coordinated by the physician who is seeing the patient on a regular basis. Patients can develop a variety of needs and problems associated with loss of the oesophagus, other treatment sequelae or psychosocial needs. The expertise of a dietician, radiologist, gastroenterologist, psychologist and social worker is often needed during follow-up.
In case of complete response to definitive CRT, a 3-month follow-up based on endoscopy, biopsies and CT scan may be recommended to detect early recurrence, for which salvage surgery may be carried out.74

Recommendations
The majority (w90%) of relapses occur within the first
2 years after completion of local therapy. Follow-up visits should concentrate on symptoms, nutrition and psychosocial support [V, A].
In case of complete response to definitive CRT, a 3-month follow-up based on endoscopy, biopsies and CT scan may be recommended to detect early recurrence [IV, B].


METHODOLOGY
This CPG was developed in accordance with the ESMO stan- dard operating procedures for CPG development (http://www. esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology). The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. An ESCAT table with ESCAT scores is included in Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.
07.03.	ESCAT scores have been defined by the authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.90 An ESMO-MCBS table with ESMO- MCBS scores is included in Supplementary Table S4, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.003. ESMO- MCBS v1.191 was used to calculate scores for therapies/in- dications approved by the EMA or FDA (https://www.esmo. org/Guidelines/ESMO-MCBS). The scores have been calcu- lated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee. The FDA/EMA or other regula- tory body approval status of new therapies/indications is re- ported at the time of writing this CPG. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the sys- tem shown in Supplementary Table S5, available at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.003.92,93 Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by
 

 
the authors. Future updates to this CPG will be published on esmo.org as a Living Guideline version or an eUpdate, to be made available at: https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/gastro intestinal-cancers/oesophageal-cancer.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Manuscript editing support was provided by Fraser Simpson and Jennifer Lamarre (ESMO Guidelines staff) and Angela Corstorphine and Sian-Marie Lucas of Kstorfin Medical Communications Ltd (KMC); this support was funded by ESMO. Nathan Cherny, Chair of the ESMO-MCBS Working Group, Urani Dafni ESMO-MCBS Working Group Member/ Frontier Science Foundation Hellas and Giota Zygoura of Frontier Science Foundation Hellas provided review and validation of the ESMO-MCBS scores. Nicola Latino (ESMO Scientific Affairs staff) provided coordination and support of the ESMO-MCBS scores and Angela Corstorphine and Sian- Marie Lucas of KMC provided medical writing and editing support in the preparation of the ESMO-MCBS table; this support was funded by ESMO. Dr Benedikt Westphalen, Dr Noelia Tarazona (members of the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group) and Dr Svetlana Jezdic (ESMO Medical Affairs Advisor) provided validation support for ESCAT scores.

FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation of this guideline. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.

DISCLOSURE
RO reports personal fees for advisory board membership of Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS) and Servier; personal fees as an invited speaker from Merck Serono and Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD) and a non-remunerated leadership role with Czecrin. MA reports personal fees for advisory board membership of BMS, Lilly, MSD and Servier and a non- remunerated role as principal investigator (PI) of the investigator-initiated trial with Merck Serono. AC reports fees paid to his institution as an invited speaker from Amgen, Foundation Medicine, Merck Serono and Roche; fees paid to his institution for advisory board membership of Amgen, AnHeart Therapeutics, Merck Serono, Roche and Transgene; personal fees for an editorial role as an Asso- ciate Editor for Annals of Oncology and ESMO Open and editor for Cancer Treatment Reviews; institutional funding as PI from Actuate Therapeutic, Adaptimmune, amcure, Amgen, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bayer, BeiGene, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), FibroGen, Genentech, Lilly, MedImmune, Merck Serono, MSD, Natera, Novartis, Servier, Sierra Oncology and Takeda and non-remunerated role as General and Scientific Director of INCLIVA Biomedical Research Institute. TL reports non-remunerated roles as President and Board Chair of the Trans-Tasman Radiation Oncology Group (TROG), Board Director and Company Secretary of Australasian Gastrointestinal Trials Group (AGITG), Global trial chair for TOPGEAR, an Intergroup randomised phase III
 
trial in gastric cancer being conducted by AGITG/TROG/ European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)/Canadian Cancer Trials Group (CCTG), Councillor of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists (RANZCR) and Councillor of the International Gastric Cancer Association (IGCA). FL reports personal fees for advisory board membership of Amgen, Astellas Pharma, BMS, Bayer, BeiGene, BioNTech, Eli Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Roche and Daiichi-Sankyo; personal fees as an invited speaker for AstraZeneca, BMS, Eli Lilly, Imedex, Incyte, MedUpdate, Medscape, Merck Serono, MSD, Roche, Serv- ier and StreamedUp!; personal fees from BioNTech and Elsevier for expert testimony; personal fees for writing engagements for Deutscher Ärzteverlag, iOMEDICO and Springer-Nature and a research grant paid to his institute from BMS. MN reports personal fees as an invited speaker at the Medtronic-sponsored Taiwan Thoracic Surgery Soci- ety 2021; fees paid to his institute for advisory board membership of Affibody, BMS and BeiGene and participa- tion in the Medtronic-sponsored European Minimally Invasive Esophagectomy (MIO) Thinktank. NCTvG reports fees paid to her institute for advisory board membership of BMS, Diaceutics and Merck/MSD and fees as an invited speaker for MEDtalks. She has also reported non-remu- nerated activities for an advisory role to the Dutch Cancer Society and the Sacha Swarttouw-Hijmans Foundation. AV reports personal fees for speaker, consultancy and advisory roles for AstraZeneca, Amgen, Basilea, BeiGene, Bayer, Boehringer Mannheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS), BTG, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Imaging Equipment Ltd (AAA), Incyte, Ipsen, Jiangsu Hengrui Med- icine, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Sanofi, Servier, Sirtex, Tahio and Terumo; research funding from Incyte and Servier; and participation in educational activities for OncLive and Oncowissen.de. ECS reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen, BMS, Imedex, Merck, Novartis, Prova Education, Servier and touchIME; personal fees for advisory board membership of Astellas, AstraZe- neca, BMS, My Personal Therapeutics, Novartis, Roche and Zymeworks; other personal fees from Amgen Trial Steering Group (TSC), BeiGene and Zymeworks for Independent Data Monitoring Committee (IDMC) membership, BMS for expert testimony, Everest Clinical Research as IDMC chair; institutional funding as a local or coordinating PI for clinical trial research from AstraZeneca, Basilea, Daiichi Sankyo, Roche, Merus and MSD and a research grant to her insti- tute from BMS.


REFERENCES
1.	Sung H, Ferlay J, Siegel RL, et al. Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLO- BOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2021;71(3):209-249.
2.	Arnold M, Abnet CC, Neale RE, et al. Global burden of 5 major types of gastrointestinal cancer. Gastroenterology. 2020;159(1):335-349.
3.	Codipilly DC, Sawas T, Dhaliwal L, et al. Epidemiology and outcomes of young-onset esophageal adenocarcinoma: an analysis from a population-based database. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2021; 30(1):142-149.
 

 
4.	Thun M, Linet MS, Cerhan JR, et al. Cancer Epidemiology and Pre- vention. 4th ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2018.
5.	McCormack VA, Menya D, Munishi MO, et al. Informing etiologic research priorities for squamous cell esophageal cancer in Africa: a review of setting-specific exposures to known and putative risk factors. Int J Cancer. 2017;140(2):259-271.
6.	El-Serag HB, Hashmi A, Garcia J, et al. Visceral abdominal obesity measured by CT scan is associated with an increased risk of Barrett’s oesophagus: a case-control study. Gut. 2014;63(2):220-229.
7.	O’Doherty MG, Freedman ND, Hollenbeck AR, et al. A prospective cohort studyofobesity and riskofoesophageal and gastric adenocarcinoma in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study. Gut. 2012;61(9):1261-1268.
8.	Parsonnet J, Friedman GD, Vandersteen DP, et al. Helicobacter pylori infection and the risk of gastric carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 1991;325(16): 1127-1131.
9.	Arnold M, Laversanne M, Brown LM, et al. Predicting the future burden of esophageal cancer by histological subtype: international trends in incidence up to 2030. Am J Gastroenterol. 2017;112(8):1247-1255.
10.	Parfitt JR, Miladinovic Z, Driman DK. Increasing incidence of adeno- carcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction and distal  stomach in Canada – an epidemiological study from 1964-2002. Can J Gastro- enterol. 2006;20(4):271-276.
11.	Shaheen NJ, Falk GW, Iyer PG, et al. ACG clinical guideline: diagnosis and management of Barrett’s esophagus. Am J Gastroenterol. 2016;111(1):30-50.
12.	Rustgi AK, El-Serag HB. Esophageal carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(26):2499-2509.
13.	Nagtegaal ID, Odze RD, Klimstra D, et al. The 2019 WHO classification of tumours of the digestive system. Histopathology. 2020;76(2):182-188.
14.	Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Integrated genomic charac- terization of oesophageal carcinoma. Nature. 2017;541(7636):169-175.
15.	Kojima T, Shah MA, Muro K, et al. Randomized phase III KEYNOTE-181 study of pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy in advanced esophageal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(35):4138-4148.
16.	Sun JM, Shen L, Shah MA, et al. Pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for first-line treatment of advanced oesophageal cancer (KEYNOTE-590): a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 study. Lancet. 2021;398(10302):759-771.
17.	Kato K, Cho BC, Takahashi M, et al. Nivolumab versus chemotherapy in patients with advanced oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma re- fractory or intolerant to previous chemotherapy (ATTRACTION-3): a multicentre, randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2019;20(11):1506-1517.
18.	Kelly RJ, Ajani JA, Kuzdzal J, et al. Adjuvant nivolumab in resected esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer. N Engl J Med. 2021;384(13):1191-1203.
19.	Shen L, Kato K, Kim SB, et al. RATIONALE 302: randomized, phase 3 study of tislelizumab versus chemotherapy as second-line treatment for advanced unresectable/metastatic esophageal squamous cell car- cinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(15 suppl):4012.
20.	Luo H, Lu J, Bai Y, et al. Effect of camrelizumab vs placebo added to chemotherapy on survival and progression-free survival in patients with advanced or metastatic esophageal squamous cell carcinoma: the ESCORT-1st randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2021;326(10):916-925.
21.	Huang J, Xu J, Chen Y, et al. Camrelizumab versus investigator’s choice of chemotherapy as second-line therapy for advanced or metastatic oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCORT): a multicentre, rand- omised, open-label, phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(6):832-842.
22.	Doki Y, Ajani JA, Kato K, et al. Nivolumab combination therapy in advanced esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2022;386(5):449-462.
23.	Shen L, Kato K, Kim SB, et al. Tislelizumab versus chemotherapy as second-line treatment for advanced or metastatic esophageal squa- mous cell carcinoma (RATIONALE-302): a randomized phase III study. J Clin Oncol. 2022:Jco2101926.
24.	Prince EA, Sanzari JK, Pandya D, et al. Analytical concordance of PD-L1 assays utilizing antibodies from FDA-approved diagnostics in advanced cancers: a systematic literature review. JCO Precis Oncol. 2021;5:953-973.
25.	 
Yeong J, Lum HYJ, Teo CB, et al. Choice of PD-L1 immunohistochemistry assay inﬂuences clinical eligibility for gastric cancer immunotherapy. Gastric Cancer. 2022;25:741-750.
26.	Lordick F, Carneiro F, Cascinu S, et al. Gastric cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. [published online ahead of print, 2022 Jul 29]. Ann Oncol. 2022. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004.
27.	Catalano MF, Van Dam J, Sivak MV. Malignant esophageal strictures: staging accuracy of endoscopic ultrasonography. Gastrointest Endosc. 1995;41(6):535-539.
28.	Krill T, Baliss M, Roark R, et al. Accuracy of endoscopic ultrasound in esophageal cancer staging. J Thorac Dis. 2019;11(suppl 12):s1602- s1609.
29.	van Vliet EPM, Heijenbrok-Kal MH, Hunink MGM, et al. Staging in- vestigations for oesophageal cancer: a meta-analysis. Br J Cancer. 2008;98(3):547-557.
30.	Flamen P, Lerut A, Van Cutsem E, et al. Utility of positron emission tomography for the staging of patients with potentially operable esophageal carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18(18):3202-3210.
31.	Heeren PAM, Jager PL, Bongaerts F, et al. Detection of distant me- tastases in esophageal cancer with 18F-FDG PET. J Nucl Med. 2004;45(6):980-987.
32.	Findlay JM, Bradley KM, Maile EJ, et al. Pragmatic staging of oesophageal cancer using decision theory involving selective endoscopic ultrasonog- raphy, PET and laparoscopy. Br J Surg. 2015;102(12):1488-1499.
33.	van de Ven S, Bugter O, Hardillo JA, et al. Screening for head and neck second primary tumors in patients with esophageal squamous cell cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. United European Gas- troenterol J. 2019;7(10):1304-1311.
34.	Gertsen EC, Brenkman HJF, van Hillegersberg R, et al. 18F-ﬂudeox- yglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography and laparoscopy for staging of locally advanced gastric cancer: a multi- center prospective Dutch cohort study (PLASTIC). JAMA Surg. 2021;156(12):e215340.
35.	Rice TW, Ishwaran H, Blackstone EH, et al. Recommendations for clinical staging (cTNM) of cancer of the esophagus and esophagogastric junction for the 8th edition AJCC/UICC staging manuals. Dis Esophagus. 2016;29(8):913-919.
36.	Cederholm T, Barazzoni R, Austin P, et al. ESPEN guidelines on defini- tions and terminology of clinical nutrition. Clin Nutr. 2017;36(1):49-64.
37.	Bischoff SC, Austin P, Boeykens K, et al. ESPEN guideline on home enteral nutrition. Clin Nutr. 2020;39(1):5-22.
38.	Sinclair R, Navidi M, Griffin SM, et al. The impact of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on cardiopulmonary physical fitness in gastro- oesophageal adenocarcinoma. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2016;98(6):396- 400.
39.	Whibley J, Peters CJ, Halliday LJ, et al. Poor performance in incremental shuttle walk and cardiopulmonary exercise testing predicts poor overall survival for patients undergoing esophago-gastric resection. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2018;44(5):594-599.
40.	van Vulpen JK, Hiensch AE, van Hillegersberg R, et al. Supervised ex- ercise after oesophageal cancer surgery: the PERFECT multicentre randomized clinical trial. Br J Surg. 2021;108(7):786-796.
41.	Tully R, Loughney L, Bolger J, et al. The effect of a pre- and post- operative exercise programme versus standard care on physical fitness of patients with oesophageal and gastric cancer undergoing neoadjuvant treatment prior to surgery (The PERIOP-OG Trial): study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials. 2020;21(1):638.
42.	Kotzerke D, Moritz F, Mantovani L, et al. The performance of three oncogeriatric screening tools - G8, optimised G8 and CARG - in pre- dicting chemotherapy-related toxicity in older patients with cancer. A prospective clinical study. J Geriatr Oncol. 2019;10(6):937-943.
43.	Mariette C, Gronnier C, Duhamel A, et al. Self-expanding covered metallic stent as a bridge to surgery in esophageal cancer: impact on oncologic outcomes. J Am Coll Surg. 2015;220(3):287-296.
44.	di Pietro M, Canto MI, Fitzgerald RC. Endoscopic management of early adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: screening, diagnosis, and therapy. Gastroenterology. 2018;154(2):421-436.
 

 
45.	Weusten B, Bisschops R, Coron E, et al. Endoscopic management of Barrett’s esophagus: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Position Statement. Endoscopy. 2017;49(2):191-198.
46.	Pimentel-Nunes P, Dinis-Ribeiro M, Ponchon T, et al. Endoscopic sub- mucosal dissection: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline. Endoscopy. 2015;47(9):829-854.
47.	Yamashina T, Ishihara R, Nagai K, et al. Long-term outcome and met- astatic risk after endoscopic resection of superficial esophageal squa- mous cell carcinoma. Am J Gastroenterol. 2013;108(4):544-551.
48.	Cao Y, Liao C, Tan A, et al. Meta-analysis of endoscopic submucosal dissection versus endoscopic mucosal resection for tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Endoscopy. 2009;41(9):751-757.
49.	Kato K, Ito Y, Nozaki I, et al. Parallel-group controlled trial of surgery versus chemoradiotherapy in patients with stage I esophageal squa- mous cell carcinoma. Gastroenterology. 2021;161(6):1878-1886.
50.	Hulscher JBF, van Sandick JW, de Boer AGEM, et al. Extended transthoracic resection compared with limited transhiatal resection for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(21):1662-1669.
51.	Biere SSAY, van Berge Henegouwen MI, Maas KW, et al. Minimally invasive versus open oesophagectomy for patients with oesophageal cancer: a multicentre, open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2012;379(9829):1887-1892.
52.	Maas KW, Cuesta MA, van Berge Henegouwen MI, et al. Quality of life and late complications after minimally invasive compared to open esophagectomy: results of a randomized trial. World J Surg. 2015;39(8):1986-1993.
53.	Mariette C, Markar SR, Dabakuyo-Yonli TS, et al. Hybrid minimally invasive esophagectomy for esophageal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2019; 380(2):152-162.
54.	van der Sluis PC, van der Horst S, May AM, et al. Robot-assisted minimally invasive thoracolaparoscopic esophagectomy versus open transthoracic esophagectomy for resectable esophageal cancer: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2019;269(4):621-630.
55.	Gottlieb-Vedi E, Kauppila JH, Mattsson F, et al. Long-term survival in esophageal cancer after minimally invasive esophagectomy compared to open esophagectomy. [published online ahead of print, 2021 Jan 20]. Ann Surg. 2021. https://doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0000000000004645.
56.	Sjoquist KM, Burmeister BH, Smithers BM, et al. Survival after neo- adjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiotherapy for resectable oeso- phageal carcinoma: an updated meta-analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(7):681-692.
57.	Ronellenfitsch U, Schwarzbach M, Hofheinz R, et al. Preoperative che- mo(radio)therapy versus primary surgery for gastroesophageal adeno- carcinoma: systematic review with meta-analysis combining individual patient and aggregate data. Eur J Cancer. 2013;49(15):3149-3158.
58.	Allum WH, Stenning SP, Bancewicz J, et al. Long-term results of a randomized trial of surgery with or without preoperative chemo- therapy in esophageal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(30):5062-5067.
59.	van Hagen P, Hulshof MCCM, van Lanschot JJB, et al. Preoperative chemoradiotherapy for esophageal or junctional cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(22):2074-2084.
60.	Cunningham D, Allum WH, Stenning SP, et al. Perioperative chemo- therapy versus surgery alone for resectable gastroesophageal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(1):11-20.
61.	Ychou M, Boige V, Pignon JP, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy compared with surgery alone for resectable gastroesophageal adeno- carcinoma: an FNCLCC and FFCD multicenter phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(13):1715-1721.
62.	Al-Batran SE, Homann N, Pauligk C, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy with ﬂuorouracil plus leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and docetaxel versus ﬂuorouracil or capecitabine plus cisplatin and epirubicin for locally advanced, resectable gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adeno- carcinoma (FLOT4): a randomised, phase 2/3 trial. Lancet. 2019;393(10184):1948-1957.
63.	Markar SR, Gronnier C, Pasquer A, et al. Role of neoadjuvant treatment in clinical T2N0M0 oesophageal cancer: results from a retrospective multi-center European study. Eur J Cancer. 2016;56:59-68.
64.	 
Goense L, Visser E, Haj Mohammad N, et al. Role of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy in clinical T2N0M0 esophageal cancer: a population-based cohort study. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2018;44(5):620-625.
65.	Mariette C, Dahan L, Mornex F, et al. Surgery alone versus chemo- radiotherapy followed by surgery for stage I and II esophageal cancer: final analysis of randomized controlled phase III trial FFCD 9901. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(23):2416-2422.
66.	Herskovic A, Martz K, al-Sarraf M, et al. Combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy compared with radiotherapy alone in patients with can- cer of the esophagus. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(24):1593-1598.
67.	Markar S, Gronnier C, Duhamel A, et al. Salvage surgery after che- moradiotherapy in the management of esophageal cancer: is it a viable therapeutic option? J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(33):3866-3873.
68.	Vincent J, Mariette C, Pezet D, et al. Early surgery for failure after chemoradiation in operable thoracic oesophageal cancer. Analysis of the non-randomised patients in FFCD 9102 phase III trial: chemo- radiation followed by surgery versus chemoradiation alone. Eur J Cancer. 2015;51(13):1683-1693.
69.	Crosby T, Hurt CN, Falk S, et al. Long-term results and recurrence patterns from SCOPE-1: a phase II/III randomised trial of definitive chemoradiotherapy /- cetuximab in oesophageal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2017;116(6):709-716.
70.	Stahl M, Stuschke M, Lehmann N, et al. Chemoradiation with and without surgery in patients with locally advanced squamous cell car- cinoma of the esophagus. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23(10):2310-2317.
71.	Bedenne L, Michel P, Bouché O, et al. Chemoradiation followed by surgery compared with chemoradiation alone in squamous cancer of the esophagus: FFCD 9102. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(10):1160-1168.
72.	Reynolds JV, Preston SR, O’Neill B, et al. Neo-AEGIS (Neoadjuvant trial in Adenocarcinoma of the Esophagus and Esophago-Gastric Junction International Study): preliminary results of phase III RCT of CROSS versus perioperative chemotherapy (Modified MAGIC or FLOT proto- col). J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(suppl 15):4004.
73.	Hoeppner J, Lordick F, Brunner T, et al. ESOPEC: prospective ran- domized controlled multicenter phase III trial comparing perioperative chemotherapy (FLOT protocol) to neoadjuvant chemoradiation (CROSS protocol) in patients with adenocarcinoma of the esophagus (NCT02509286). BMC Cancer. 2016;16:503.
74.	Conroy T, Galais MP, Raoul JL, et al. Definitive chemoradiotherapy with FOLFOX versus ﬂuorouracil and cisplatin in patients with oesophageal cancer (PRODIGE5/ACCORD17): final results of a randomised, phase 2/ 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15(3):305-314.
75.	de Vos-Geelen J, Hoebers FJP, Geurts SME, et al. A national study to assess outcomes of definitive chemoradiation regimens in proximal esophageal cancer. Acta Oncol. 2020;59(8):895-903.
76.	Minsky BD, Pajak TF, Ginsberg RJ, et al. INT 0123 (Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 94-05) phase III trial of combined-modality therapy for esophageal cancer: high-dose versus standard-dose radiation therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20(5):1167-1174.
77.	Hulshof M, Geijsen ED, Rozema T, et al. Randomized study on dose esca- lation in definitive chemoradiation for patients with locally advanced esophageal cancer (ARTDECO Study). J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(25):2816-2824.
78.	Moehler M, Maderer A, Thuss-Patience PC, et al. Cisplatin and 5- ﬂuorouracil with or without epidermal growth factor receptor inhibi- tion panitumumab for patients with non-resectable, advanced or metastatic oesophageal squamous cell cancer: a prospective, open- label, randomised phase III AIO/EORTC trial (POWER). Ann Oncol. 2020;31(2):228-235.
79.	Chau I, Ayers D, Goring S, et al. Comparative effectiveness of nivolu- mab versus clinical practice for advanced gastric or gastroesophageal junction cancer. J Comp Eff Res. 2020;9(2):103-114.
80.	Hayashi K, Ando N, Watanabe H, et al. Phase II evaluation of protracted infusion of cisplatin and 5-ﬂuorouracil in advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: a Japan Esophageal Oncology Group (JEOG) Trial (JCOG9407). Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2001;31(9):419-423.
81.	Bleiberg H, Conroy T, Paillot B, et al. Randomised phase II study of cisplatin and 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) versus cisplatin alone in advanced
 

 
squamous cell oesophageal cancer. Eur J Cancer. 1997;33(8):1216- 1220.
82.	Lorenzen S, Schuster T, Porschen R, et al. Cetuximab plus cisplatin-5- ﬂuorouracil versus cisplatin-5-ﬂuorouracil alone in first-line metasta- tic squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: a randomized phase II study of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie. Ann Oncol. 2009;20(10):1667-1673.
83.	Hall PS, Swinson D, Cairns DA, et al. Efficacy of reduced-intensity chemo- therapy with oxaliplatin and capecitabine on quality of life and cancer control among older and frail patients with advanced gastroesophageal cancer: the GO2 phase 3 randomized clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2021;7(6): 869-877.
84.	Shitara K, Özgüro˘glu M, Bang YJ, et al. Pembrolizumab versus paclitaxel for previously treated, advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction cancer (KEYNOTE-061): a randomised, open-label, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2018;392(10142):123-133.
85.	Kato K, Tahara M, Hironaka S, et al. A phase II study of paclitaxel by weekly 1-h infusion for advanced or recurrent esophageal cancer in patients who had previously received platinum-based chemotherapy. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2011;67(6):1265-1272.
86.	Muro K, Hamaguchi T, Ohtsu A, et al. A phase II study of single-agent docetaxel in patients with metastatic esophageal cancer. Ann Oncol. 2004;15(6):955-959.
87.	 
Burkart C, Bokemeyer C, Klump B, et al. A phase II trial of weekly iri- notecan in cisplatin-refractory esophageal cancer. Anticancer Res. 2007;27(4c):2845-2848.
88.	Rodríguez-Camacho E, Pita-Fernández S, Pértega-Díaz S, et al. Characteristics and pattern of recurrence after curative surgery in oesophageal cancer. Rev Esp Enferm   Dig.   2015;107(9):539- 546.
89.	Ni W, Yang J, Deng W, et al. Patterns of recurrence after surgery and efficacy of salvage therapy after recurrence in patients with thoracic esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. BMC Cancer. 2020;20(1):144.
90.	Mateo J, Chakravarty D, Dienstmann R, et al. A framework to rank genomic alterations as targets for cancer precision medicine: the ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets (ESCAT). Ann Oncol. 2018;29(9):1895-1902.
91.	Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J, et al. ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(10):2340-2366.
92.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144.
93.	Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18(3):421.
