clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology 26 (Supplement 5): v108–v115, 2015

Peripheral T-cell lymphomas: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up†
F. d’Amore1, P. Gaulard2, L. Trümper3, P. Corradini4, W.-S. Kim5, L. Specht6, M. Bjerregaard Pedersen1 & M. Ladetto7, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Hematology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark; 2Department of Pathology, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France; 3Department of Hematology and Oncology, Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany; 4Department of Hematology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, University of Milan, Milan, Italy; 5Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea; 6Department of Oncology and Hematology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 7Divisione di Ematologia, Azienda Ospedaliera Santi Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy



 
introduction
The present guidelines cover the systemic subtypes of primary nodal and primary extranodal peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs). ESMO guidelines for primary cutaneous T-cell lymph- omas are published separately [1]. Primary leukaemic PTCL sub- types (i.e. T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia, T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukaemia, adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma and ag- gressive NK-cell leukaemia) are not covered by the present guide- lines. Primary nodal PTCLs include PTCL-not otherwise speciﬁed (PTCL-NOS), anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL), both fusion protein ALCL anaplastic lymphoma kinase positive (ALCL ALK+) and ALCL anaplastic lymphoma kinase negative (ALCL
ALK−), and angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL). The
primary extranodal PTCL subtypes covered by the present guide- lines comprise enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma (EATL), extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (ENKTCL), and hepa- tosplenic T-cell lymphoma (HSTCL).

epidemiology
PTCLs are uncommon and heterogeneous malignant lymphopro- liferative disorders that originate from post-thymic (peripheral) T cells or mature natural killer (NK) cells. They represent 10%– 15% of all non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. Nodal subtypes are the most frequent in Caucasian patients (>80% of PTCL in Europe,
PTCL-NOS 34%, AITL 28%, ALCL ALK+ 6%, ALCL ALK− 9%)
[2]. In Asia, the PTCL incidence is higher due to the endemic oc- currence of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated ENKTCL (44% of PTCL in Asia excluding Japan, where there is a relatively higher frequency of adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma) [2]. EATL is more frequent in Northern Europe (9%–10% as compared with 1%–2% in Asia) [2], where there is a higher occurrence of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes associated with coeliac disease. Other PTCL subtypes have been associated with chronic
 
autoimmune disorders, such as HSTCL to Crohn’s disease [3]. In PTCL, the male/female ratio is 2:1 and the median age at diagnosis is between the sixth and seventh decades of life, but both sex and age patterns vary according to different subtypes [2, 4, 5]. The ALCL ALK+ subtype has a better prognosis than the other PTCL
entities, including its ALK−counterpart [6]. Recent reports have
suggested that the prognostic difference between ALCL ALK+ and ALCL ALK− may at least be partly due to age-related differences (ALK+ patients are generally younger than the other PTCL
patients) [7]. HSTCL occurs most frequently in younger to middle- aged males in the setting of immunosuppressive treatment [8].

diagnosis
A PTCL diagnosis should be made by an expert haematopatholo- gist and should, whenever possible, rely on an excisional tumour tissue biopsy that provides enough material for formalin-ﬁxed samples. According to the WHO classiﬁcation (2008), the distinc- tion among different PTCL entities requires the integration of the clinical picture, morphology, immunohistochemistry, ﬂow cytometry, cytogenetics, and molecular biology [3]. In PTCL, the indication of the neoplastic nature of a given T-cell population is based on (i) morphology, (ii) aberrant T-cell phenotype, and (iii) clonally rearranged T-cell receptor (TCR) genes (αβ versus γδ genotypes) [9].
Table 1 summarises the immunophenotype of the PTCL en- tities covered by the present guidelines along with their TCR re- arrangement features and putative cell of origin. Accumulating evidence indicates that information on TCR and the cell of origin plays an important role in both tumour biology and clinical be- haviour, underscoring the clinical relevance of this information in the light of an increasing number of targeted therapeutic options. TIA1, granzyme B and perforin suggest a cytotoxic proﬁle, which may imply a more aggressive clinical behaviour in PTCL-NOS [10]. At least three of the following markers: CD10, Bcl6,
 
 		CXCL13, PD1, SAP, ICOS, and CCR5 are suggestive of a follicular
 
*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, via L. Taddei 4, CH-6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland.
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org

†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: June 2015.
 
T-helper (FTH) cell origin [9, 11, 12]. Although FTH cells are considered to be the cell of origin in AITL, this diagnosis should also be based on morphological parameters such as hyperplasia of follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), arborising high endothelial
 

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines

PTCL entity     Immunophenotypic features	TCR	Presumed cell of origin
 
Nodal	PTCL-NOS	CD4>CD8, frequent antigen loss (CD5, CD7), CD30+/−,
CD56+/−, subset FTH features, cytotoxic granules+/−
AITL	CD4+, CD10+/−, BCL+/−, CXCL13+, PD1+, ICOS+/−,
SAP+/, CCR5+/−, hyperplasia of FDC, EBV+ B blasts
ALCL ALK+ ALK+, CD30+, EMA+, CD25+, cytotoxic granules+, CD4+/−, CD3+/−
ALCL ALK- ALK−, CD30+, EMA+, CD25+, cytotoxic granules+, CD4+/−, CD3+/−
 
αβ, rarely γδ	Variable, mostly T-helper cell

αβ	FTH

αβ	Cytotoxic T-cell

αβ	Cytotoxic T-cell
 
Extranodal EATL, type 1 CD8(+)/−, CD56−, HLA-DQ2/-DQ8	αβ	Intra-epithelial T cells (αβ), pre-
existing enteropathy
EATL, type 2 CD8+, CD56+, HLA-DQ2/-DQ8	γδ or αβ	Intra-epithelial T cells or NK, no pre-existing enteropathy
 
NKTCL	CD2+, CD56+, surface CD3−, cytoplasmic CD3ε+, gr B+, TIA-1+, perforin+, EBV+, LMP1
 
TCR in germline configuration, rarely αβ or γδ
 
NK, rarely cytotoxic T cells
 
HSTCL	CD3+, CD56+/−, CD4−, CD8+/−, CD5−, TIA1+, gr M+,
gr B−, perforin−
 
γδ, rarely αβ	Cytotoxic T cell of the innate immune system
 

PTCL, peripheral T-cell lymphomas; PTCL-NOS, PTCL-not otherwise specified; AITL, angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma; ALCL ALK+, anaplastic large-cell lymphoma anaplastic lymphoma kinase positive; ALCL ALK-, ALCL anaplastic lymphoma kinase negative; EATL, enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma; NKTCL, natural killer/T-cell lymphoma; HSTCL, hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma; FTH, follicular T helper; FDC, follicular dendritic cell; EMA, epithelial membrane antigen; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; TCR, T-cell receptor; NK, natural killer.


 
venules and a substantial B-cell component, including EBV- infected B-cell blasts [13]. ENKTCL cases show intra-cytoplasmic CD3 (ɛ-chain), in contrast to other PTCL subtypes that only express CD3 on the cell surface [3]. CD56 is helpful in differenti-
ating between EATL type I (CD8+/CD56−) and type II (CD8
−/CD56+), which is also more often γδ+ and is not associated
with coeliac disease [3]. CD30 plays a central role in the recogni- tion of ALCL. ALCL is systematically PAX5-negative, frequently epithelial membrane antigen (EMA)-positive and, in one-third of the cases, CD45-negative. It is further categorised as ALK+ or
ALK− depending on the occurrence or lack of occurrence of the
classical t(2;5) translocation (or one of its variants) [3, 9]. CD20 and PAX5 allow for the identiﬁcation of B-cell components and can help in distinguishing ALCL ALK− from morphologically ag- gressive classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma (PAX5+) with anaplastic
features. CD21 is useful in revealing the content of FDCs in AITL; CD68 visualises the histiocytic component that can occasionally outnumber the neoplastic cell population (e.g. lymphoepithelioid PTCL-NOS, Lennert’s variant and the lymphohistiocytic variant of ALCL). The assessment of EBV (Epstein-Barr encoding region [EBER] in situ hybridisation) is important in T-cell malignancies, as some of the entities (e.g. ENKTCL and a subset of PTCL-NOS) show EBER positivity in the neoplastic cells.

staging and risk assessment
A complete blood count, routine blood chemistry including lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and uric acid as well as screening tests for HIV, HTLV-1, and hepatitis B and C are required. At baseline, patients should have at least a computed tomography
 
(CT) scan of the chest and abdomen, as well as a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy. 18Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography combined with computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) is increasingly used in nodal PTCL at baseline and re- staging, but its role at the subtype-speciﬁc level still needs further elucidation. PET may be useful for detecting residual disease at the end of treatment, although residual FDG-avid lesions lack speciﬁcity and biopsy conﬁrmation is recommended. The use of PET/CT is recommended in ENKTCL, where it is documented to be a valuable modality for staging and treatment planning [14–18].

prognostic indices
The International Prognostic Index (IPI) [19] is the most com- monly used prognostic tool in nodal PTCL. A prognostic index for PTCL-NOS [20] with later modiﬁcation [21] has been pro- posed, but does not univocally appear to be more useful than the original IPI [4, 22]. For clinical practice purposes, the IPI is therefore still the recommended tool. Male sex has been reported as an adverse prognostic factor [5, 23]. In ENKTCL, high EBV-DNA copy number is correlated with tumour load and is an adverse outcome predictor [24].

treatment
nodal PTCL (PTCL-NOS, AITL, ALCL ALK+, ALCL ALK−)
ﬁrst-line treatment. Treatment strategies should be adapted according to factors such as age, IPI, and co-morbidity that
 
clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology

 
deﬁne a patient’s eligibility for dose-intensiﬁed approaches. Whenever possible, inclusion in a clinical trial is recommended. A treatment algorithm for newly diagnosed PTCL is shown in Figure 1A. Cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, vincristine and prednisone (CHOP), or variants of it, has been the most commonly used regimen in nodal PTCL. In patients less than 60 years of age with ALCL ALK+ histology, CHOP with the addition of etoposide (CHOEP) has shown some outcome beneﬁts in terms of event-free but not overall survival (OS). CHOEP was mostly
feasible in younger patients (≤60 years), toxicity being a limiting
factor in older patients [25]. In a large cohort of treatment-naïve PTCL patients, a schedule of 6 courses of bi-weekly CHOEP followed by autologous stem-cell transplantation (autoSCT) demonstrated an overall response rate (ORR) of 82%, with 51% achieving a complete response (CR) [23]. At a median follow-up of 4.5 years, the three included nodal PTCL entities had an
estimated 5-year OS and a progression-free survival (PFS) of 70% and 61% (ALCL ALK−), 52% and 49% (AITL) and 47%
and 38% (PTCL-NOS). Recent population-based data also indicate that upfront autoSCT in chemosensitive patients is associated with improved OS [5]. On the basis of these data, a dose-dense CHOEP schedule followed by autoSCT in chemosensitive and transplant-eligible patients represents an evidence-based approach adoptable outside of a clinical trial [III, B] (Figure 1A).
Other induction regimens have been tried, e.g. platinum and gemcitabine combinations. In newly diagnosed patients, a recent phase II trial testing the PEGS regimen (cisplatin, etoposide, gem- citabine, and methylprednisolone) revealed a disappointing ORR of 39% and a 2-year PFS of only 14% [26]. Therefore, although the role of anthracyclines in PTCL is still debated, anthracycline- void regimens have, so far, failed to demonstrate their superiority to CHOP/CHOEP as the standard chemotherapy regimen outside clinical trials. In low-risk (low-/low-intermediate IPI) ALCL ALK+ patients, consolidation with autoSCT is not recom- mended, since these patients seem to have a more favourable outcome compared with other PTCL subtypes, with a 5-year failure-free survival (FFS) of 60%–80% [6]. The few patients with truly localised (stage I) disease should receive a shortened chemo- therapy schedule (e.g. 3 courses), followed by local radiotherapy, since retrospective analyses seem to indicate a survival advantage for a combined modality approach in early stage disease [27–29] (see ‘Radiotherapy’ section). Frail patients not eligible for inten- sive chemotherapy schedules may be considered for less toxic approaches such as monotherapy schedules, e.g. with gemcitabine [30] or bendamustine [31].

relapse. Although a fair number of patients with nodal PTCL are chemosensitive, their response duration is often short and relapses are frequent. Except for CD30+ ALCL, there is no standard of care for relapsed/refractory nodal PTCL. The only globally approved salvage treatment in PTCL is the anti-CD30 antibody conjugate brentuximab vedotin (BV) administered in the setting of relapsed systemic ALCL (regardless of the ALK status). In a pivotal phase II study, BV monotherapy in heavily pre-treated, noncutaneous ALCL patients yielded an ORR of 86% and a CR rate of 57%, with a median response duration of 12.6 months [32]. Anti- CD30-directed BV monotherapy in relapsed/refractory ALCL is, therefore, evidence-supported and recommended [III, A]. This
 
treatment may also be useful to bridge eligible patients towards allogeneic stem-cell transplantation (alloSCT). A proposed treatment algorithm is summarised in Figure 1B. For relapsed/ refractory nodal PTCL other than ALCL, inclusion into clinical trials is highly encouraged. Outside clinical trials, in ﬁt patients, combination chemotherapy regimens such as DHAP (dexamethasone, high-dose cytarabine, cisplatin) or ICE (ifosphamide, etoposide, carboplatin) can be attempted in chemosensitive patients with an available donor, aiming at alloSCT as a potentially curative modality. In unﬁt patients, monotherapy with gemcitabine or bendamustine are generally well-tolerated, with an ORR of approximately 50% but with modest durations of response [30, 31]. Promising new drugs are under current evaluation in clinical trials. Of these new compounds, the anti- folate pralatrexate and the histone deacetylase inhibitors romidepsin and belinostat, have recently been conditionally approved in the US, based on phase II trial results [33, 34]. The same is the case for the anti-CCR4 antibody mogamulizumab, whose label in Japan has recently been extended from adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma to cover also relapsed/refractory PTCL and transformed mycosis fungoides [35]. Phase III studies are ongoing in the upfront setting for all of these new compounds.

EATL
ﬁrst-line treatment. In EATL, outcome after standard CHOP chemotherapy is generally poor. Recent reports indicate that, for patients sufﬁciently ﬁt to tolerate more aggressive chemotherapy regimens, outcome can be signiﬁcantly improved. A regimen with ifosphamide, vincristine, etoposide, and methotrexate (IVE/ MTX) followed by autoSCT has shown promising results, with 5-year OS and PFS of 60% and 52%, respectively [36]. In addition, CHOEP-14 consolidated with autoSCT has shown improved outcomes compared with standard CHOP [III, B] [23]. In a European Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation- based registry study, 4-year OS and PFS for EATL patients receiving intensive induction regimens followed by autoSCT in ﬁrst CR/partial response (PR) were 59% and 54%, respectively [37]. It is difﬁcult to estimate the proportion of all EATL patients amenable to intensive therapies, but at least one-half of the patients aged <70 years may be considered for standard-dose chemotherapy. If these patients respond to therapy, their performance status may improve, thus allowing for subsequent autoSCT.

relapse. No evidence-based speciﬁc relapse regimen can be recommended in relapsed/refractory EATL. Therefore, considerations similar to those described for ‘nodal entities’ (see above) are also applicable to relapsed/refractory EATL. In transplant-eligible patients who retain chemosensitivity at relapse and have a suitable donor, alloSCT should be attempted.

ENKTCL
ﬁrst-line treatment. The treatment strategy for this subtype of lymphoma is unique in the context of PTCL. L-asparaginase- containing regimens such as SMILE (dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosphamide, L-asparaginase, etoposide) and AspaMetDex (L-asparaginase, methotrexate, dexamethasone) have produced promising results [38, 39]. Anthracycline-based regimens (CHOP or CHOP-like) are not effective [40]. Addition of radiation to
 
A	B































Figure 1. Integrated management algorithm (according to, e.g. risk factors, stage and histological subtype) in the (A) front-line and (B) relapsed/refractory setting. (A) § Stage I: shortened chemotherapy schedule (e.g. 3 courses) followed by curatively intended RT (see ‘Radiotherapy’ section). *ALCL ALK+ with a high-risk proﬁle (e.g. IPI >2) should be considered for autoSCT consolidation, while autoSCT in low risk proﬁle patients is not recommended. # if donor available. ¤ SMILE or AspaMetDex. (B) $: Pralatrexate and romidepsin: FDA but not EMA approved. PTCL, peripheral T-cell lymphomas; PTCL-NOS, PTCL-not otherwise
speciﬁed; AITL, angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma; ALCL ALK+, anaplastic large-cell lymphoma anaplastic lymphoma kinase positive; ALCL ALK-, ALCL anaplastic lymphoma kinase negative; EATL, enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma; HSTCL, hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma; ENKTCL, extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma; CHOEP, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, vincristine, etoposide, prednisone; CHOP, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, vincristine, prednisone; IVE/MTX, ifosfamide, vincristine, etoposide/methotrexate; ICE, ifosphamide, etoposide, and carboplatin; IVAC, ifosphamide, cytarabine, etoposide; PR, partial response; CR, complete response; alloSCT, allogeneic stem-cell transplantation; autoSCT, autologous stem-cell transplantation; rel/ref, relapsed/refractory; BV, brentuximab vedotin; DHAP, dexamethasone, high-dose cytarabine, cisplatin; SMILE, dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosphamide, L-asparaginase, etoposide; CS, clinical stage; RT, radiotherapy.
 
clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology

 
chemotherapy is the preferred treatment of localised disease [40]. EBV DNA copy number from plasma or whole blood can be used as a biomarker for response; therefore, serial monitoring of EBV DNA copy number is recommended [15]. ENKTCL is FDG-avid, and although the role of PET/CT for response evaluation is not yet fully clariﬁed, PET/CT is the recommended imaging modality in ENKTCL.

stages I–II. Most patients present with stage I–II nasal disease. In these cases, radiation combined with chemotherapy is the preferred treatment [40, 41]. Concurrent chemoradiotherapy and sequential chemotherapy with L-asparaginase-containing regimens followed by radiation appear to have comparable efﬁcacy [III, A]. A radiation dose >50 Gy is recommended when treating with radiation alone. However, with radiosensitisers such as
cisplatin, a weekly dose of ∼40 Gy can give a comparable outcome.
Central nervous system prophylaxis is not recommended, although the disease involves nasal and/or paranasal areas. Instances of localised disease outside the nasal region are rare. If feasible, radiation with or without chemotherapy seems to be a more effective treatment compared with chemotherapy alone. The role of high-dose chemotherapy followed by haematopoietic stem-cell transplantation (HSCT) is still controversial. For elderly and/or frail patients, radiation alone is recommended.

stages III–IV. L-asparaginase-containing chemotherapy regi- mens should be preferred as front-line treatment [III, A]. If complete remission is achieved, high-dose chemotherapy with HSCT is recom- mended. AutoSCT is preferable due to higher treatment-related mor- tality after alloSCT. For elderly and frail patients, L-asparaginase single agent or mild chemotherapy regimens (AspaMetDex or dose- modiﬁed SMILE) can be recommended [42].

relapse. A repeated pre-therapeutic biopsy is strongly recom- mended, since some of the PET-positive lesions can represent inﬂammatory changes secondary to ulceration. Selection of a salvage regimen depends on the type of primary treatment and response duration. In early relapse (<12 months) after anthracy- cline-based prior treatment, L-asparaginase-containing regimens should be recommended. For patients who received L-asparagi- nase regimens upfront, a gemcitabine-based (e.g. GELOX, gem- citabine, L-asparaginase, oxaliplatin) regimen can be considered for salvage treatment [41]. Although transplant-speciﬁc data are very limited, either auto- or alloSCT should be considered in transplant-eligible patients. Both modalities should preferably be tested in clinical trials.

HSTCL
ﬁrst-line treatment. HSTCL has one of the worst prognoses among PTCLs, with 5-year FFS and OS rates of less than 10%. All cases should be treated with chemotherapy at diagnosis. Although most patients have only brief responses to anthracycline-based therapy, limited evidence suggests that they may respond to a platinum/cytarabine-based induction regimen. In the case of chemosensitivity to induction therapy, upfront consolidation with auto- or alloSCT should be offered to all eligible patients, since it may offer the only chance for durable remission [8, 43]. Recently,
 
intense regimens such as ICE, IVAC (ifosphamide, cytarabine, etoposide), or dose-dense CHOEP/EPOCH (etoposide, vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide and prednisone) have been proposed and auto- or alloSCT consolidation in ﬁt patients is recommended [IV, B] [23, 44].

relapse. No evidence-based speciﬁc relapse regimen can be recommended in relapsed/refractory HSTCL. If chemosensitivity is achieved by current relapse regimens, alloSCT should be attempted in eligible patients, since a graft-versus-host effect has also been described in relapsed/refractory disease.


radiotherapy
PTCL seem to be somewhat less radiosensitive than the aggres- sive B-cell lymphomas [45], and higher radiation doses may be needed, although still lower than for most solid tumours.

front-line treatment
Most types of PTCLs usually present with advanced disease. The few patients with localised disease may be treated with local radiotherapy after chemotherapy [27–29], although no rando- mised evidence regarding this approach exists. Recommended doses are 30–40 Gy [46]. Because of the somewhat lower radio- sensitivity of PTCLs, doses of 40 Gy should be preferred, in par- ticular if residual lymphoma is present after chemotherapy. The treated volume should include only the initially involved volume with appropriate margins for uncertainty, according to the prin- ciples of involved site radiotherapy (ISRT) [47]. High-quality imaging before chemotherapy should be obtained in order to allow for optimal planning of subsequent radiotherapy. Modern advanced radiation treatment techniques should be used to min- imise long-term toxicity [47].
ENKTCLs have special features. They most commonly involve the nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses, and Waldeyer’s ring. Radiotherapy is an important part of the treatment and should be administered early [III, A] [15, 48]. Patients with stage I disease may be treated with radiotherapy alone to a dose of
≥50 Gy [49]. Alternatively, and for patients with risk factors or
stage II disease, concomitant chemoradiotherapy with a plat- inum-containing regimen and radiotherapy dose of ≥50 Gy is an option [41]. With more effective chemotherapy regimens, se- quential chemoradiation with radiation doses of 45–50 Gy may be used. ENKTCL is often locally destructive and may inﬁltrate
extensively in the submucosa of the upper aerodigestive tract. A generous ISRT volume is recommended, covering the entire organ(s) involved with lymphoma before chemotherapy plus ad- jacent structures with concern for subclinical disease. Advanced imaging including PET/CT and magnetic resonance imaging and conformal radiotherapy techniques should be used.

relapse/refractory disease
Palliative radiotherapy may be used to treat locally symptomatic disease.  Usual palliative  doses  of 30 Gy in 10 fractions may be used.
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines

 
autologous stem-cell transplantation (autoSCT)
front-line treatment
There are no randomised prospective studies to guide clinicians in the decision on whether to perform autoSCT consolidation in ﬁrst remission versus expectant observation. A body of pro- spective literature has accumulated that evaluates an up-front autoSCT in PTCL [23, 50–52]. Recent population-based data also indicate that upfront autoSCT in chemosensitive patients is associated with improved OS [5]. The nodal entities (PTCL-
NOS, AITL, and ALCL mostly restricted to ALK− cases) re-
present the majority of patients enrolled in clinical trials. ALCL ALK+ patients usually have been excluded from upfront autoSCT trials, given their superior outcome following CHOP or CHOP-like regimens. The largest prospective study evaluat- ing autoSCT consolidation in de novo PTCL was carried out by the Nordic group, where patients achieving CR or PR after a CHOEP-based dose-dense induction schedule received BEAM (carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, melphalan) conditioning and autoSCT. With the caveat of phase II data, autoSCT in ﬁrst remission seems quite feasible and possibly beneﬁcial in the selected subset of transplant-eligible PTCL [III, B].


allogeneic stem-cell transplantation (alloSCT)
AlloSCT is a potentially curative option for patients affected by PTCL. The ﬁrst prospective phase II results demonstrated sus- tained responses in relapsed/refractory PTCL patients, suggest- ing the existence of a possible ‘graft-versus-T-cell lymphoma’ effect [III, B] [53, 54]. Non-relapse mortality (NRM) was low, supporting the feasibility of a reduced-intensity conditioning alloSCT (RIC-alloSCT) even in heavily pre-treated patients. Retrospective and registry-based analyses also conﬁrmed that alloSCT can yield long-term responses in relapsed/refractory PTCL [55–58]. In extranodal subtypes data are anecdotal, but generally supportive of the feasibility and efﬁcacy of alloSCT. In a recently reported prospective trial carried out in treatment- naïve PTCL patients, after an induction phase with intensive chemoimmunotherapy, responding patients were randomised to auto- or alloSCT based on the availability of a HLA identical sibling or a matched unrelated donor [59]. The sample size did not allow identiﬁcation of a preferred approach among the two; however, allo- and autografted patients had a 4-year PFS of 69% and 70%, respectively. In conclusion, alloSCT is a valid treatment option in transplant-eligible relapsed PTCL patients, also after a failed prior autograft. The beneﬁt is most evident in chemosensi- tive patients. A RIC-alloSCT should be preferred to a myeloabla- tive approach in order to reduce NRM. In the upfront setting, alloSCT should be carried out primarily within clinical trials.

relapsed/refractory disease
For patients with relapsed/refractory PTCLs, potential curative options include consolidation with either an autoSCT or alloSCT. Although often appropriately offered, not all patients are able to have a transplant due to highly refractory and progressive disease.
 
The literature remains controversial with regard to the long-term outcomes with autoSCT in this setting [60].

personalised medicine
Two personalised approaches are currently widely accepted and formally approved in the treatment of PTCL. One is the use of L-asparaginase in the treatment of ENKTCL and the other is the use of the anti-CD30 antibody conjugate BV for the treat- ment of relapsed/refractory ALCL also with the purpose of bridging eligible patients to alloSCT. BV is also currently being tested as part of the upfront treatment in CD30-positive PTCL other than ALCL. Increasing knowledge of the molecular mechanisms involved in PTCL pathogenesis is accumulating. This may lead to new and more targeted treatment approaches in the near future. Currently, no evidence-based personalised medicine approaches are available for patients with PTCL-NOS, AITL, EATL, and HSTCL. In these settings, more research is needed to identify molecular markers which could lead to advances in personalised medicine.

response evaluation and follow-up
In systemic PTCL, a midway interim evaluation should be carried out in order to assess chemosensitivity. Increasing evi- dence points at PTCL as consistently FDG-avid tumours [61, 62] providing the rationale for the use of PET/CT, particularly in the context of residual disease evaluation. Diagnostic imaging (CT or PET/CT) should be repeated at the end of treatment along with a bone marrow biopsy (only if initially involved). Presently, no evi- dence-based recommendation is possible with regard to the length of follow-up. However, in the Nordic NLG-T-01 trial, where a cohort of 160 evaluable systemic PTCL patients were fol- lowed over a median period of 5 years (range: 2–8 years), 7% of all relapses occurred after 2 years [23]. On this basis, a follow-up schedule consisting of history and physical examination every 3 months for 1 year, every 6 months for 2 more years, and then once a year for detection of secondary tumours or other long- term side-effects [V, C]. CT examinations at 6, 12, and 24 months after the end of treatment are usual practice, but there is no deﬁnitive evidence that routine imaging in patients in com- plete remission provides any outcome advantage [V, C]. Routine surveillance with PET scan is not recommended.

methodology
These clinical practice guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for clinical prac- tice guidelines development. The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 2. Statements without grading were considered justiﬁed standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.

conﬂict of interest
FA has reported Scientiﬁc advisory boards and speaker’s honor- aria: Takeda, Norpharma, Kyowa Kirin, CTI Life Sciences,
 
clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology


 
Seattle Genetics, Inﬁnity. Research support: Sanoﬁ, Amgen. PG has reported Scientiﬁc advisory boards and speaker’s honoraria: Takeda. LT has reported Research grants from Sanoﬁ, Amgen, Roche and Mundipharma. WSK: Research supported by grants from Takeda, Novartis, Celgene, Roche. LS has reported Scientiﬁc advisory board and speaker’s honoraria: Takeda. PC has reported Scientiﬁc advisory boards and speaker’s honoraria: Takeda, Celgene, Roche, Novartis, Sanoﬁ, Gilead, Janssen. ML has reported honoraria from Celgene, Janssen-Cilag, Roche, Amgen, Mundipharma and Teva; research contracts from Celgene, Pﬁzer, Mundipharma and Roche; funds received from Amgen, Roche and Takeda. MBP has reported no conﬂicts of interests.
references
1.	Willemze R, Hodak E, Zinzani PL et al. Primary cutaneous lymphomas: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2013; 24(Suppl 6): vi149–vi154.
2.	Vose J, Armitage J, Weisenburger D. International peripheral T-cell and natural killer/T-cell lymphoma study: pathology ﬁndings and clinical outcomes. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 4124–4130.
3.	Swerdlow S, Campo E, Harris NL et al. Eds. WHO Classiﬁcation of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissue. Lyon: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 2008.
4.	Pedersen MB, Hamilton-Dutoit SJ, Bendix K et al. Evaluation of clinical trial eligibility and prognostic indices in a population-based cohort of systemic peripheral T-cell lymphomas from the Danish Lymphoma Registry. Hematol Oncol 2014 [Epub ahead of print].
5.	Ellin F, Landstrom J, Jerkeman M, Relander T. Real-world data on prognostic factors and treatment in peripheral T-cell lymphomas: a study from the Swedish Lymphoma Registry. Blood 2014; 124: 1570–1577.
6.	Savage KJ, Harris NL, Vose JM et al. ALK- anaplastic large-cell lymphoma is clinically and immunophenotypically different from both ALK+ ALCL and peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise speciﬁed: report from the International Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma Project. Blood 2008; 111: 5496–5504.
7.	Sibon D, Fournier M, Briere J et al. Long-term outcome of adults with systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma treated within the Groupe d’Etude des Lymphomes de l’Adulte trials. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 3939–3946.
8.	Ferreri AJ, Govi S, Pileri SA. Hepatosplenic gamma-delta T-cell lymphoma. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2012; 83: 283–292.
 
9.	Gaulard P, de Leval L. Pathology of peripheral T-cell lymphomas: where do we stand? Semin Hematol 2014; 51: 5–16.
10.	Asano N, Suzuki R, Kagami Y et al. Clinicopathologic and prognostic signiﬁcance of cytotoxic molecule expression in nodal peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspeciﬁed. Am J Surg Pathol 2005; 29: 1284–1293.
11.	de Leval L, Rickman DS, Thielen C et al. The gene expression proﬁle of nodal peripheral T-cell lymphoma demonstrates a molecular link between angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) and follicular helper T (TFH) cells. Blood 2007; 109: 4952–4963.
12.	Iqbal J, Weisenburger DD, Greiner TC et al. Molecular signatures to improve diagnosis in peripheral T-cell lymphoma and prognostication in angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma. Blood 2010; 115: 1026–1036.
13.	de Leval L, Gaulard P. Pathology and biology of peripheral T-cell lymphomas. Histopathology 2011; 58: 49–68.
14.	Chan WK, Au WY, Wong CY et al. Metabolic activity measured by F-18 FDG PET in natural killer-cell lymphoma compared to aggressive B- and T-cell lymphomas. Clin Nucl Med 2010; 35: 571–575.
15.	Kwong YL, Anderson BO, Advani R et al. Management of T-cell and natural-killer- cell neoplasms in Asia: consensus statement from the Asian Oncology Summit 2009. Lancet Oncol 2009; 10: 1093–1101.
16.	Zhou X, Lu K, Geng L et al. Utility of PET/CT in the diagnosis and staging of extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 2014; 93: e258.
17.	Tse E, Kwong YL. How I treat NK/T-cell lymphomas. Blood 2013; 121: 4997–5005.
18.	Moon SH, Cho SK, Kim WS et al. The role of 18F-FDG PET/CT for initial staging of nasal type natural killer/T-cell lymphoma: a comparison with conventional staging methods. J Nucl Med 2013; 54: 1039–1044.
19.	A predictive model for aggressive non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The International Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma Prognostic Factors Project. N Engl J Med 1993; 329: 987–994.
20.	Gallamini A, Stelitano C, Calvi R et al. Peripheral T-cell lymphoma unspeciﬁed (PTCL-U): a new prognostic model from a retrospective multicentric clinical study. Blood 2004; 103: 2474–2479.
21.	Went P, Agostinelli C, Gallamini A et al. Marker expression in peripheral T-cell lymphoma: a proposed clinical-pathologic prognostic score. J Clin Oncol 2006; 24: 2472–2479.
22.	Gutierrez-Garcia G, Garcia-Herrera A, Cardesa T et al. Comparison of four prognostic scores in peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Ann Oncol 2011; 22: 397–404.
23.	d’Amore F, Relander T, Lauritzsen GF et al. Up-front autologous stem-cell transplantation in peripheral T-cell lymphoma: NLG-T-01. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 3093–3099.
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines

 
24.	Suzuki R, Yamaguchi M, Izutsu K et al. Prospective measurement of Epstein-Barr virus-DNA in plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells of extranodal NK/T- cell lymphoma, nasal type. Blood 2011; 118: 6018–6022.
25.	Schmitz N, Trumper L, Ziepert M et al. Treatment and prognosis of mature T-cell and NK-cell lymphoma: an analysis of patients with T-cell lymphoma treated in studies of the German High-Grade Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Study Group. Blood 2010; 116: 3418–3425.
26.	Mahadevan D, Unger JM, Spier CM et al. Phase 2 trial of combined cisplatin, etoposide, gemcitabine, and methylprednisolone (PEGS) in peripheral T-cell non- Hodgkin lymphoma: Southwest Oncology Group Study S0350. Cancer 2013; 119: 371–379.
27.	Weisenburger DD, Savage KJ, Harris NL et al. Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise speciﬁed: a report of 340 cases from the International Peripheral T-cell Lymphoma Project. Blood 2011; 117: 3402–3408.
28.	Zhang XM, Li YX, Wang WH et al. Survival advantage with the addition of radiation therapy to chemotherapy in early stage peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise speciﬁed. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2013; 85: 1051–1056.
29.	Zhang XM, Li YX, Wang WH et al. Favorable outcome with doxorubicin-based chemotherapy and radiotherapy for adult patients with early stage primary systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. Eur J Haematol 2013; 90: 195–201.
30.	Zinzani PL, Venturini F, Stefoni V et al. Gemcitabine as single agent in pretreated T-cell lymphoma patients: evaluation of the long-term outcome. Ann Oncol 2010; 21: 860–863.
31.	Damaj G, Gressin R, Bouabdallah K et al. Results from a prospective, open-label, phase II trial of bendamustine in refractory or relapsed T-cell lymphomas: the BENTLY trial. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 104–110.
32.	Pro B, Advani R, Brice P et al. Brentuximab vedotin (SGN-35) in patients with relapsed or refractory systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma: results of a phase II study. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 2190–2196.
33.	O’Connor OA, Pro B, Pinter-Brown L et al. Pralatrexate in patients with relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma: results from the pivotal PROPEL study. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 1182–1189.
34.	Piekarz RL, Frye R, Prince HM et al. Phase 2 trial of romidepsin in patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Blood 2011; 117: 5827–5834.
35.	Ogura M, Ishida T, Hatake K et al. Multicenter phase II study of mogamulizumab (KW-0761), a defucosylated anti-cc chemokine receptor 4 antibody, in patients with relapsed peripheral T-cell lymphoma and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 1157–1163.
36.	Sieniawski M, Angamuthu N, Boyd K et al. Evaluation of enteropathy-associated T- cell lymphoma comparing standard therapies with a novel regimen including autologous stem cell transplantation. Blood 2010; 115: 3664–3670.
37.	Jantunen E, Boumendil A, Finel H et al. Autologous stem cell transplantation for enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma: a retrospective study by the EBMT. Blood 2013; 121: 2529–2532.
38.	Kwong YL, Kim WS, Lim ST et al. SMILE for natural killer/T-cell lymphoma: analysis of safety and efﬁcacy from the Asia Lymphoma Study Group. Blood 2012; 120: 2973–2980.
39.	Jaccard A, Gachard N, Marin B et al. Efﬁcacy of L-asparaginase with methotrexate and dexamethasone (AspaMetDex regimen) in patients with refractory or relapsing extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, a phase 2 study. Blood 2011; 117: 1834–1839.
40.	Kim WS, Song SY, Ahn YC et al. CHOP followed by involved ﬁeld radiation: is it optimal for localized nasal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma? Ann Oncol 2001; 12: 349–352.
41.	Yamaguchi M, Tobinai K, Oguchi M et al. Concurrent chemoradiotherapy for localized nasal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma: an updated analysis of the Japan clinical oncology group study JCOG0211. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 4044–4046.
42.	Yang L, Liu H, Xu XH et al. Retrospective study of modiﬁed SMILE chemotherapy for advanced-stage, relapsed, or refractory extranodal natural killer (NK)/T cell lymphoma, nasal type. Med Oncol 2013; 30: 720.
43.	Tanase A, Schmitz N, Stein H et al. Allogeneic and autologous stem cell transplantation for hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma: a retrospective study of the EBMT Lymphoma Working Party. Leukemia 2015; 29: 686–688.
44.	Voss MH, Lunning MA, Maragulia JC et al. Intensive induction chemotherapy followed by early high-dose therapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
 
results in improved outcome for patients with hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma: a single institution experience. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk 2013; 13: 8–14.
45.	Sakata K, Fuwa N, Kodaira T et al. Analyses of dose-response in radiotherapy for patients with mature T/NK-cell lymphomas according to the WHO classiﬁcation. Radiother Oncol 2006; 79: 179–184.
46.	Lowry L, Smith P, Qian W et al. Reduced dose radiotherapy for local control in non- Hodgkin lymphoma: a randomised phase III trial. Radiother Oncol 2011; 100: 86–92.
47.	Illidge T, Specht L, Yahalom J et al. Modern radiation therapy for nodal non-Hodgkin lymphoma-target deﬁnition and dose guidelines from the International Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2014; 89: 49–58.
48.	Huang MJ, Jiang Y, Liu WP et al. Early or up-front radiotherapy improved survival of localized extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal-type in the upper aerodigestive tract. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2008; 70: 166–174.
49.	Bi XW, Li YX, Fang H et al. High-dose and extended-ﬁeld intensity modulated radiation therapy for early-stage NK/T-cell lymphoma of Waldeyer’s ring: dosimetric analysis and clinical outcome. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2013; 87: 1086–1093.
50.	Corradini P, Dodero A, Farina L et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation following reduced-intensity conditioning can induce durable clinical and molecular remissions in relapsed lymphomas: pre-transplant disease status and histotype heavily inﬂuence outcome. Leukemia 2007; 21: 2316–2323.
51.	Rodriguez J, Conde E, Gutierrez A et al. Frontline autologous stem cell transplantation in high-risk peripheral T-cell lymphoma: a prospective study from The Gel-Tamo Study Group. Eur J Haematol 2007; 79: 32–38.
52.	Reimer P, Rudiger T, Geissinger E et al. Autologous stem-cell transplantation as ﬁrst-line therapy in peripheral T-cell lymphomas: results of a prospective multicenter study. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 106–113.
53.	Corradini P, Dodero A, Zallio F et al. Graft-versus-lymphoma effect in relapsed peripheral T-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas after reduced-intensity conditioning followed by allogeneic transplantation of hematopoietic cells. J Clin Oncol 2004; 22: 2172–2176.
54.	Dodero A, Spina F, Narni F et al. Allogeneic transplantation following a reduced- intensity conditioning regimen in relapsed/refractory peripheral T-cell lymphomas: long-term remissions and response to donor lymphocyte infusions support the role of a graft-versus-lymphoma effect. Leukemia 2012; 26: 520–526.
55.	Kim SW, Tanimoto TE, Hirabayashi N et al. Myeloablative allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a nationwide survey in Japan. Blood 2006; 108: 382–389.
56.	Le Gouill S, Milpied N, Buzyn A et al. Graft-versus-lymphoma effect for aggressive T-cell lymphomas in adults: a study by the Societe Francaise de Greffe de Moelle et de Therapie Cellulaire. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 2264–2271.
57.	Smith SM, Burns LJ, van Besien K et al. Hematopoietic cell transplantation for systemic mature T-Cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 3100–3109.
58.	Kyriakou C, Canals C, Goldstone A et al. High-dose therapy and autologous stem- cell transplantation in angioimmunoblastic lymphoma: complete remission at transplantation is the major determinant of outcome – Lymphoma Working Party of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. J Clin Oncol 2008; 26: 218–224.
59.	Corradini P, Vitolo U, Rambaldi A et al. Intensiﬁed chemo-immunotherapy with or without stem cell transplantation in newly diagnosed patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Leukemia 2014; 28: 1885–1891.
60.	Zinzani PL. High-dose therapy and stem cell transplantation. Semin Hematol 2010; 47(Suppl 1): S15–S17.
61.	Tsukamoto N, Kojima M, Hasegawa M et al. The usefulness of (18)F- ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography ((18)F-FDG-PET) and a comparison of (18)F-FDG-pet with (67)gallium scintigraphy in the evaluation of lymphoma: relation to histologic subtypes based on the World Health Organization classiﬁcation. Cancer 2007; 110: 652–659.
62.	Khong PL, Pang CB, Liang R et al. Fluorine-18 ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in mature T-cell and natural killer cell malignancies. Ann Hematol 2008; 87: 613–621.
63.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
