
Annals of Oncology 26 (Supplement 5): v85–v99, 2015
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdv203 Published online 4 August 2015

Philadelphia chromosome-negative chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up†
A. M. Vannucchi1, T. Barbui2, F. Cervantes3, C. Harrison4, J.-J. Kiladjian5, N. Kröger6, J. Thiele7 & C. Buske8, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, Florence; 2Hematology and Foundation for Research, Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy; 3Department of Hematology, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 4Department of Haematology, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; 5Centre d’Investigations Cliniques (INSERM CIC1427), Hôpital Saint-Louis and Paris Diderot University, Paris, France; 6Department of Stem Cell Transplantation, University Hospital Hamburg, Hamburg; 7University of Cologne, Cologne; 8Comprehensive Cancer Center Ulm, Institute of Experimental Cancer Research, University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany




 
incidence
According to the 2008 World Health Organization (WHO) clas- siﬁcation, classical Philadelphia chromosome/BCR-ABL nega- tive chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) include polycythaemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythaemia (ET) and primary myeloﬁbrosis (PMF) [1]. The reported worldwide annual incidence rate of MPNs ranges from 0.44 to 5.87/105, with the lowest incidence being reported in Japan and Israel [2]. These great ranges may reﬂect racial/geographic differences as well as differences in study design, diagnostic criteria and methods of reporting, among others. The estimated incidence rate in Europe is 0.4–2.8 × 105/year for PV, 0.38–1.7 × 105/year for ET and 0.1–1× 105/year for PMF [2]. There are few reliable estimates of the prevalence [2, 3]. The last is likely to be rising due to earlier diagnosis and trends towards prolonged survival [4]. The reported median age at diagnosis ranges from 65–74 years for PV, 64–73 years for ET, and 69–76 years for PMF [2].

diagnosis and pathology/molecular biology
To achieve the most accurate diagnosis possible, the 2008 WHO classiﬁcation is recommended. It is based upon standardised morphological features, ideally using specimens obtained before treatment, and is integrated with haematological, molecular and clinical diagnostic criteria (Table 1). For full details and images of classical morphological features, the reader is referred to the WHO publication [1]. European consensus-based criteria for grading of cellularity and bone marrow (BM) ﬁbrosis should be followed (Table 2) [6].
 
In PV, classical BM features are a moderate to overt increase in  age-matched  cellularity,  due  to  a  trilineage  proliferation ( panmyelosis) of erythroid and granulocytic precursors and megakaryocytes in variable proportions. Megakaryocytes are characterised by a pleomorphic appearance due to the variability in sizes, from small to giant cells, without gross abnormalities of maturation. There may be minimal (grade 1) reticulin ﬁbrosis, which is very rarely grade 2.
In ET, age-adjusted cellularity is normal or sometimes slightly increased; there is no left-shifted neutrophil granulopoiesis. Any case with a mild to moderate panmyelosis is suspicious for early PV rather than ET. Megakaryocytes have increased in number and are randomly distributed within the BM, with scattered forms or a few loose clusters. Large to giant mature megakaryo- cytes with extensively folded (staghorn-like) nuclei and mature cytoplasm are in the majority. Gross disturbances of the histo- logic topography or extensive dense clustering of megakaryo- cytes should not be detectable. There is no substantial increase of reticulin ﬁbres. The WHO classiﬁcation suggests that these features clearly distinguish ET from pre-ﬁbrotic/early PMF; however, minor diagnostic criteria should also be present in order to assign this diagnosis (Table 1).
In the initial phases of PMF, the BM is often hypercellular with prominent granulocytic and megakaryocytic proliferation, frequently with a reduction of erythroid precursors. If reticulin ﬁbrosis is present, grade 1 is allocated. Megakaryopoiesis is characterised by the extensive formation of loose to dense clus- ters of megakaryocytes, with abnormal localisation toward the endosteal borders. Megakaryocyte anomalies include a high degree of cellular atypia (from small to giant forms), abnormal nuclear folding and an aberrant nuclear cytoplasmic ratio
 
 		created by large, bulbous and hyperchromatic cloud-shaped
 
*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via L. Taddei 4, CH-6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland.
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org

†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: July 2015.
 
nuclei. Naked (bare) megakaryocytic nuclei are often visible.
Overall, the megakaryocytes in PMF show a more pronounced degree of atypia than in other MPN subtypes. The more advanced ﬁbro-osteosclerotic phases of PMF are characterised by grade ≥2
 

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology

Polycythaemia vera (PV)	Essential thrombocythaemia (ET)	Primary myelofibrosis (PMF)
 
Major criteria	1. Haemoglobin
 
1.	Platelet count ≥450 × 109/l	1. Megakaryocyte proliferation and atypiab
 
>18.5 g/dl (men)
>16.5 g/dl (women)
or a any other evidence of increased red cell volume
2.	Presence of JAK2V617F or JAK2
exon 12 mutation
 
2.	Megakaryocyte proliferation with large and mature morphology


3.	Not meeting WHO criteria for CML, PV, PMF, MDS or other myeloid neoplasm
4.	Demonstration of JAK2V617F or
other        clonal         marker         or no evidence of reactive thrombocytosis
 
accompanied by either reticulin and/or collagen fibrosis, or c


2.	Not meeting WHO criteria for CML, PV, MDS or other myeloid neoplasm

3.	Demonstration of JAK2V617F or other      clonal       marker       or no evidence of reactive BM fibrosis
 
Minor criteria	1. BM trilineage myeloproliferation	1. Leukoerythroblastosis
2.	Sub-normal sEPO level	2. Increased serum LDH level
 
3.	Endogenous erythroid colony growth
 
3.	Anaemia
4.	Palpable splenomegaly
 

aHb or HCT >99th percentile of reference range for age, sex or altitude of residence or red cell mass >25% above mean normal predicted or Hb >17 g/dl (men)/>15 g/dl (women) if associated with a sustained increase of ≥2 g/dl from baseline that cannot be attributed to correction of iron deficiency.
bSmall to large megakaryocytes with aberrant nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and hyperchromatic and irregularly folded nuclei and dense clustering.
cIn the absence of reticulin fibrosis, the megakaryocyte changes must be accompanied by increased marrow cellularity, granulocytic proliferation and often decreased erythropoiesis (i.e. pre-fibrotic PMF).
PV diagnosis requires meeting either both major criteria and one minor criterion or the first major criterion and two minor criteria. ET diagnosis requires meeting all four major criteria. PMF diagnosis requires meeting all three major criteria and two minor criteria.
Note: mutations in calreticulin (CALR) will be included as major diagnostic criteria for ET and PMF in the upcoming (2015) revised WHO classification [5].
BM, bone marrow; WHO, World Health Organization; CML, chronic myelogenous leukaemia; MDS, myelodysplastic syndromes; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; sEPO, serum erythropoietin; Hb, haemoglobin; HCT, haematocrit.


 

 

reticulin deposition, and the appearance of coarse bundles of col- lagen ﬁbres. Additional features include endophytic bone forma- tion (osteosclerosis) associated with extension of adipose tissue. Dilated marrow sinuses with intraluminal haematopoiesis, espe- cially made up of megakaryocytes, are often seen.
The morphological hallmark of post-polycythaemia vera mye- loﬁbrosis (PPV-MF) and post-essential thrombocythaemia myeloﬁbrosis (PET-MF) is overt reticulin and collagen ﬁbrosis of the BM. Cellularity varies, but hypocellularity is common.
 

Clusters of megakaryocytes (often with hyperchromatic and abnormal nuclei) are prominent, while erythropoiesis and granulopoiesis are decreased. Osteosclerosis may occur. However, these ﬁndings must be integrated with other features to achieve a diagnosis (Table 3).
Although a number of clinicopathological studies have demonstrated that a reliable morphological differentiation can be achieved with high consensus rates [8–10], both the reprodu- cibility and the clinical usefulness of the WHO classiﬁcation of MPNs remain controversial issues, especially concerning the distinction between ET and pre-ﬁbrotic/early myeloﬁbrosis (MF) as well as initial cases of PV from ET or even PMF [11, 12]. To avoid incorrect classiﬁcation, comprehensive evaluation and, if necessary, re-evaluation of patients are suggested. This also ensures that the patient is not unnecessarily diagnosed as ‘MPN-unclassiﬁed’.
MPNs are characterised by somatic recurrent mutations and are included as the main criteria in the 2008 WHO classiﬁcation (Table 1), for which a further revision is expected in the future due to the newly discovered calreticulin (CALR) mutations [5]. These mutations include the Janus kinase (JAK) 2V617F muta- tion, found in ≥95% of PV and ∼60% of ET and PMF patients.
3%–5% of ET and 5%–8% of PMF patients have point mutations
at codon 515 of the gene encoding the thrombopoietin receptor
MPL (W>L, K or A).
Abnormalities (deletions/duplications/substitutions) located in exon 12 of JAK2 are detected exclusively in 2%–4% of PV.
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines


 
About 60%–80% of JAK2 and MPL un-mutated patients with ET and PMF have mutations in the exon 9 of CALR. Therefore, virtually all patients with PV have a mutation in JAK2. Conversely, 10%–15% of ET and PMF patients remain molecu- larly uncharacterised, and are operationally deﬁned as ‘triple negative’ for the three phenotypic driver mutations. The pres- ence of any of these mutations excludes reactive forms of ery- throcytosis, thrombocytosis and MF, but does not indicate a speciﬁc MPN subtype. These mutations can be found using methods such as conventional sequencing, qualitative and quan- titative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and high-resolution melting analysis (may have a sensitivity of 1% and higher). Whole blood or puriﬁed granulocytes are harvested and tested; the latter is preferred in cases with low mutation burden, as is often the case with JAK2 exon12 mutations. Genotyping should be obtained at diagnosis. It is not recommended to measure the mutation burden serially during follow-up or to assess response to treatment, except following allogeneic stem-cell transplant- ation (alloSCT) and, possibly, interferon (IFN) treatment. In such instances, a detection limit of JAK2V617F allele burden of
≤0.1% is recommended [13].

achieving an accurate diagnosis
Accurate differentiation among the three unique MPN subtypes as well as the exclusion of reactive conditions (in mutation- negative patients only) and disorders such as myelodysplasia and chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) are critical for appropri- ate prognosis and therapy decision making. It is not acceptable to use the generic diagnostic label ‘MPN’ alone [I, A]. The 2008 WHO diagnostic criteria for MPN outlined in Table 1 should be followed strictly [1]. Any patient with suspected MPN should be tested for the three driver mutations [I, B]. A simpliﬁed diagnos- tic algorithm is presented in Figure 1. A diagnosis of PPV-MF
 
or PET-MF is made using the criteria described by the International Working Group for Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Research and Treatment (IWG-MRT) (Table 3).


assessment of prognosis
Any patient newly diagnosed with MPN should be categorised at baseline according  to the risks associated  with the disease [I, B]. It must be realised that the prognostic scoring systems used for risk-adapted therapy in PV and ET are based on the likelihood of patients developing thrombotic complications. These complications are the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in PV and ET patients. Scores predicting for overall survival in PV and ET are also available, yet considering the long survival of these disorders, they do not currently impact treatment decisions [14, 15]. The recommended prognostic scoring system for PV and ET is based upon two variables: age >60 years and previous history of thrombosis. These variables separate patients into low- or high- risk categories (Table 4). In ET, an intermediate-risk group is sometimes advocated. However, this group is variably deﬁned and there is no clear evidence of how to manage patients in this cat- egory. Thrombocytosis (>1000 × 109/l) is a risk factor for haemor- rhage, and advocates caution for the use of aspirin. Extreme thrombocytosis (>1500 × 109/l) is regarded as an indication for therapy in ET, and less frequently in PV. Improved risk stratiﬁca- tion is desirable, but any new risk stratiﬁcation should be robust, easily measurable and ideally validated in a prospective manner.
Since the median survival in PMF is ∼6 years, ranging from
<2 to >10 years, the relevant end point for current prognostic scoring systems in PMF is represented by survival (Table 5). The International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) [18] is used at the time of diagnosis to outline four risk categories (low, inter- mediate-1, intermediate-2 and high risk), with median survival of 135, 95, 48 and 27 months, respectively. The ‘dynamic’ IPSS
 







 
Figure 1. Diagnostic algorithm for MPN, based on the 2008 WHO criteria. PV, polycythaemia vera; ET, essential thrombocythaemia; PMF, primary myeloﬁbrosis; SN, sub-normal EPO level; N, EPO levels in the normal range; IN, increased EPO level above normal range; BM biopsy, bone marrow biopsy; WHO, World Health Organization.
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines

 
(DIPSS) [19], which utilises the same variables as the IPSS, is employed during follow-up. A reﬁnement is represented by DIPSS-plus score [20] that incorporates thrombocytopaenia, transfusion requirements and abnormal cytogenetics (Table 5). The role of CALR [21] and other mutations (i.e. EZH2, ASXL1, SRSF2, IDH1/2 mutations), comprising a high-molecular risk category in PMF [22], has been underscored but has yet to be

 
 
incorporated in an updated prognostic score. Appropriate risk stratiﬁcation in PMF has relevance for risk-adapted therapy, particularly for alloSCT. These scores are commonly used for PPV-MF and PET-MF. It should be underlined that they have not been validated in such a context, and their appropriateness has been questioned [23].

management
Treatment aims are to reduce the risk of thrombosis and haem- orrhage, control symptoms and perhaps reduce the risk of pro- gression (Figure 2). Cure is not presently possible, except in selected MF patients who are successfully receiving alloSCT. All patients should be informed regarding the disease course, and vascular risk factors such as smoking should be aggressively managed.

polycythaemia vera
PV therapy should address both short- and long-term objectives (Figure 2A). In the short-term, therapeutic aims are to reduce the risk of occurrence and recurrence of thrombosis. The long- term objective is to reduce the risk of evolution to MF, myelo- dysplastic syndrome (MDS) and/or acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) [16]. Risk stratiﬁcation (Table 4) aims at selecting the patients with a low risk of vascular events. PV is associated with elevated haematocrit (HCT); with these patients, phlebotomy is carried out to control the HCT and low-dose aspirin is used, as it may delay the need for cytoreductive therapy.

ﬁrst-line therapy. Phlebotomy can be an emergency therapy at diagnosis, in patients presenting with very high HCT and clinical signs of hyperviscosity, as well as a long-term maintenance
 


Variable	IPSS [18]
	DIPSS [19]
DIPSS-plus [20]
Age >65 years	✓		✓	✓
Constitutional symptoms	✓		✓	✓
Haemoglobin (Hb) <10 g/dl
Leukocyte count >25 × 109/l	✓
✓		✓
✓	✓
✓
Circulating blasts >1%
Platelet count <100 × 109/l	✓		✓	✓
✓
RBC transfusion need
Unfavourable karyotypea				✓
✓
	1 point each		1 point each but Hb = 2	Calculated by the DIPSS score (Int
				1 = 1, Int 2 = 2, High = 3) plus one
				additional point for each of the
				three additional variables
Risk group	Points	Median survival (years)	Points	Median survival (years)	Points	Median survival (years)
Low	0	11.3	0	n.r.	0	15.4
Intermediate-1	1	7.9	1–2	14.2	1	6.5
Intermediate-2	2	4.0	3–4	4	2–3	2.9
High	≥3	2.3	5–6	1.5	≥4	1.3







 








 
Figure 2. Therapeutic algorithms for polycythaemia vera, essential thrombocythaemia, and myeloﬁbrosis. * Dynamic IPSS and Dynamic IPSS-plus after diagnosis. **Hydroxyurea for symptomatic splenomegaly in countries where ruxolitinib is not approved for low-risk patients. If anaemia is the problem, erythropoietin, corticosteroids, danazol, immunomodulators or splenectomy. ***For patients presenting with symptomat- ic splenomegaly and/or constitutional symptoms if allowed by the label. §For patients presenting with symptomatic splenomegaly and/or constitutional symptoms. PV, polycythaemia vera; ET, essential thrombo- cythaemia; LD-Asa, low-dose aspirin; HU, hydroxyurea; INF-α, interferon-α; IPSS, International Prognostic Score System; Int, intermediate; AlloSCT, allogeneic stem cell transplantation.
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines

 
therapy to control the HCT [I, A]. The optimal target of HCT levels for reducing vascular events  was a  matter of debate, but, a recent multicentre, randomised clinical trial  (CYTO- PV) showed that the HCT should be  maintained  strictly below 45% to efﬁciently reduce the risk of thrombotic events [I, A] [24]. Low-dose aspirin is the second cornerstone of PV therapy [I, A]. It has been shown in the European Collaboration on Low-dose Aspirin in Polycythaemia Vera (ECLAP) study, a large European double-blind, placebo- controlled, randomised trial, to signiﬁcantly reduce a primary combined end point, including: cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke and major venous thromboembolism [25].
A cytoreductive drug should be prescribed in high-risk PV patients, i.e. >60 years and/or with a history of a vascular event. In 2011, the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) published recom- mendations for the management of PV, concluding that hydro- xyurea (HU) [II, A] and IFN-α [III, B] were recommended as ﬁrst-line treatments for high-risk patients [16]. HU is a well- known cytoreductive agent, with good efﬁcacy and tolerance in the majority of patients. In the unique randomised trial compar- ing HU with another cytoreductive drug ( pipobroman) in PV, the cumulative incidence of AML/MDS at 10, 15 and 20 years was 6.6%, 16.5% and 24% in the HU arm and 13%, 34% and 52% in the pipobroman arm, respectively (P = 0.004) [26]. Other studies from registry data and prospective analysis with shorter follow-up failed to attribute a clear leukaemogenic risk to HU [17, 27]. Overall, there is no deﬁnitive evidence for (or against) a leukaemogenic risk of HU, but it should be empha- sised that this risk may appear after prolonged exposure to this drug. Thus, it seems reasonable to adopt a conservative ap- proach and to consider alternative treatments in young subjects, and in those previously treated with other myelosuppressive agents. IFN-α has been shown to induce a high rate of haemato- logical response and to signiﬁcantly reduce the malignant clone, as shown by the percentage of mutated allele JAK2V617F in two phase II studies [28, 29]. However, this drug (in any of its various presentations) is not approved for the treatment of PV. Two phase III studies comparing HU to pegylated forms of IFN-α are ongoing in the United States and Europe. These studies should help to better deﬁne the efﬁcacy and tolerance of each drug in the short term [30]. Whenever possible, patients should be recruited into these studies [II, B]. Aquagenic pruritus is a disabling symptom in some PV patients: IFN-α or JAK2 inhibitors can be used to treat this symptom. Other options include antihistamines, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and PUVA ( psolarens + ultraviolet A) therapy [IV, B] [31, 32].


second-line therapy. The choice of second-line myelosuppres- sive drugs for PV should be carefully evaluated because some drugs administered after HU may enhance the risk of acute leukaemia [II, B] [33]. Finally, in selected patients, alkylating agents like busulfan may be useful when other drugs have failed or are contraindicated, although they are characterised as inducing an increased leukaemogenic risk [III, C] [16]. In PV, a phase III study showed the use of ruxolitinib was superior, compared with the best available therapy, to control HCT and splenomegaly in PV patients who are resistant or intolerant to
 
HU. These results suggest that ruxolitinib could be a new option as a second-line therapy in PV [I, A] [34].

essential thrombocythaemia
Aspirin in ET has never been evaluated in a randomised, con- trolled trial, and there is a concern that bleeding is a particular risk for ET patients with extreme thrombocytosis (>1000 × 109/l) [35]. Low-dose aspirin is recommended in the setting of high- risk ET patients without a clear contraindication to this therapy [III, B]. For low-risk ET patients, a retrospective analysis sug- gested that only those who are either JAK2V617F-positive or have cardiovascular risk factors may beneﬁt from anti-platelet therapy [36]. Pending further data, we recommend low-dose aspirin for low-risk ET patients, since thrombosis remains the major clinical hazard [III, B] (Figure 2B).
The choice of the most appropriate ﬁrst-line cytoreductive therapy for high-risk ET is based on three randomised trials [37–39]. There is a debate regarding whether HU, anagrelide or IFN-α should be the treatment of choice. In addition, there is an increased interest in ‘pegylated’ forms of IFN. HU versus no myelosuppressive therapy signiﬁcantly reduced the rate of thrombosis in high-risk ET patients, most of whom received anti-platelet prophylaxis with aspirin or ticlopidine [37]. The use of anagrelide versus HU has been evaluated in the PT-1 study and the non-inferiority ANAHYDRET study. Anagrelide was equivalent to HU in reducing platelet counts in both studies. In the PT-1 study, an excess of arterial thrombosis was seen in the anagrelide arm compared with HU [38]. However, in the ANAHYDRET, study equivalence was reported [39]. The use of HU and low-dose aspirin as ﬁrst-line therapy for high- risk ET is recommended, but in speciﬁc groups of patients, IFN or sometimes anagrelide may be appropriate [I, B]. Whenever possible, patients with ET should be enrolled in randomised studies evaluating HU compared with IFN. According to current label approvals in Europe, anagrelide may be used as second-line therapy for patients who are resistant or intolerant to HU. IFN or busulfan are also options available in this setting. The use of cytotoxic agents, in the youngest patients and/or especially in combination, should be avoided where possible [III, B]. In the presence of extensive thrombocytosis (>1.500 × 109/l), the bene- ﬁts of anti-platelet agents should be balanced against the risks of haemorrhages due the occurrence of acquired von Willebrand disease [35].

myeloﬁbrosis
Since there is no curative therapy other than alloSCT for PMF and PPV-/PET-MF, treatment is essentially palliative and is gen- erally guided by the predominant symptoms, anaemia and splenomegaly (Figure 2C).

anaemia. A haemoglobin <10 g/dl usually triggers consider- ation of treatment, but there are individual variations depending upon age and comorbidities. One of the ﬁrst options is erythropoiesis-stimulating agents, which produce improvements in 23%–60% of patients [40, 41]. Response is often restricted to patients with inadequate erythropoietin levels (<125 mU/ml), and less frequently when there is signiﬁcant splenomegaly or transfusion dependence. If no response is obtained at three
 
clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology

 
months, treatment should be stopped [III, B]. Androgens such as nandrolone, ﬂuoxymesterone, methandrostenolone and oxy- metholone improve anaemia in 30%–60% of patients [IV, B]. Similar results with less toxicity are obtained with danazol, with the overall response rate being 35% [III, B] [42]. The recommen- ded dose is 400–600 mg daily maintained for at least 6 months, then progressively reduced to the minimum necessary for main- tenance. Immunomodulating drugs may also be useful in man- aging anaemia but are frequently withdrawn early, due to toxicity. Low-dose thalidomide combined with oral prednisone provides a 23%–29% response [III, C] [43]. Lenalidomide, com- bined with low-dose prednisone taper, produces a 19% response [III, C] [44]. Lenalidomide as a single agent is the treatment of choice for MF patients with 5q deletion [V, C] [45]. Splenectomy can be useful in patients with transfusion-dependent anaemia re- fractory to drug therapy [IV, B] [46], but needs careful consider- ation due to complication rates (see below). Corticosteroids alone may also be used for the management of refractory anaemia in patients unresponsive to the above drugs, and who are not eligible for alloSCT or splenectomy. Corticosteroids used alone are often observed to result in modest haemoglobin increases and improve- ments in patient well-being [V, C].

splenomegaly and extra-medullary haematopoiesis. Traditionally, treatment of splenomegaly was not instituted before the appearance of associated symptoms, particularly due to the inherent risk of worsening cytopaenias. HU was previously the ﬁrst-line therapy for symptomatic splenomegaly, with an overall response of 40% [IV, B] [47]. However, published experience
suggests that after 1 year of treatment, ∼80% of patients require
an alternative therapy. The use of HU is now largely superseded by JAK inhibitors (see below). Splenectomy is indicated in patients with large and painful splenomegaly where JAK inhibitors are not available or prove ineffective [46]. Splenectomy requires an experienced surgical team and critical care support to minimise the risks associated with the procedure; a perioperative mortality rate of 5%–10% and a morbidity rate up to 25% can be expected [IV, D] [46]. Splenic irradiation can also be applied in patients who do not tolerate JAK inhibitors and are poor candidates for surgery [IV, D] [48]. However, beneﬁt is transient and involves the risk of severe cytopaenias; therefore, its routine use is not recommended. Low-dose radiation is the therapy of choice for symptomatic extra-medullary haematopoiesis in places other than the spleen and liver, as well as for MF- associated pulmonary hypertension, due to extra-medullary haematopoiesis [IV, B] [49].

JAK inhibitors. The JAK inhibitors act mainly by inhibiting dysregulated JAK-STAT signalling, present in all MF patients. They are not selective of the mutated JAK2; therefore, they are indicated in both JAK2-mutated and JAK2-unmutated MF. Ruxolitinib, an oral JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor, is the ﬁrst in-class drug approved for MF treatment [50]. Thrombocytopaenia is a main adverse event observed with JAK inhibitors, and worsening anaemia is often seen, especially at the beginning of therapy. These drugs are also associated with an increased risk of infection. Spleen reduction and symptom control are usually dramatic but are also drug- and dose-dependent.
 
It has been reported that sudden ruxolitinib withdrawal can provoke a shock-like syndrome, due to the re-emergence of the suppressed inﬂammatory cytokines [51]. Though this side-effect is rare, abrupt interruption should be avoided and withdrawal of the drug should be tapered.
Two phase III studies compared ruxolitinib with placebo (COMFORT-I) [52] or best available therapy (COMFORT-II) [53]; both attained the primary end point of ≥35% reduction in
spleen volume by imaging techniques at 24 or 48 weeks of treat-
ment, respectively [I, A]. The effect on JAK2V617F allele burden was modest [54]. A survival advantage for patients treated with ruxolitinib was ﬁrst shown from historical comparison with matched MF populations [55, 56]. Extended follow-up of the phase III studies indicated a survival advantage for patients on ruxolitinib [54]. However, there is little evidence of a disease- modifying effect. Other JAK inhibitors are currently being studied in clinical trials, although several trials have been with- drawn due to emergent neurological toxicity. The precise mech- anism for this toxicity is unclear but merits close monitoring.

stem-cell transplantation. AlloSCT is currently the only curative treatment approach for MF, resulting in resolution of BM ﬁbrosis, molecular remission and restoration of normal haematopoiesis [57, 58]. Depending on the disease status, patient’s
performance status, comorbidities and donor availability, ∼40%–
70% of patients can be cured [57, 58]. Careful patient selection is mandatory, due to the inherent risks of alloSCT. Patients with PV or ET are not candidates for alloSCT, unless their disease has transformed into MF or secondary acute leukaemia [59]. Results with completely matched, related and unrelated donors are superior to those with human leukocyte antigen-mismatched donors [57, 60]. Reduced-intensity conditioning regimens resulting in lower therapy-related complications have broadened the availability of alloSCT to older patients, but a direct comparison to standard myeloablative conditioning is lacking [57, 59]. According to ELN recommendations, it is justiﬁed to offer alloSCT to eligible patients with MF whose median survival is expected to be <5 years. This includes patients with intermediate-2 and high risk according to IPSS [III, A] [16]. Splenectomy is generally not recommended in preparation for alloSCT [IV, D]. Pre-transplant JAK inhibitor treatment can reduce spleen size and improve constitutional symptoms, but is currently being tested in clinical studies and should be regarded as experimental [IV, D].

personalised medicine
MPNs are diseases that typically affect people within a mid- advanced age group. Therefore, any treatment decisions, espe- cially regarding thrombosis prevention and selection of patients for alloSCT, should consider the patient’s general condition and comorbidities. The diagnostic approach has improved remark- ably with the discovery of recurrent phenotypic driver muta- tions, but there is still a need for standardised and validated mutational tests. The interpretation of BM histopathology fea- tures, as required by the current WHO classiﬁcation, requires experienced pathologists, particularly for the differential diagno- sis of early and/or for mutation-negative cases.
There are a number of prognostic scores that are useful for guiding treatment, yet they have been built on retrospective
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines

 
series and are not validated prospectively, nor in the settings of conventional or new therapies. This is a challenge of particular relevance today, when novel targeted drugs are being used in clinical trials, and the ﬁrst in-class JAK inhibitor has been approved. However, in spite of these recent advancements, we have to acknowledge that there are still too few effective treat- ment options for highly heterogeneous diseases such as MPNs, which additionally show high degrees of variability from patient to patient. In this disease setting, more research is needed to identify molecular markers which could lead to advances in personalised medicine.

long-term follow-up and response evaluation
In patients with asymptomatic and well-controlled PV, follow- up visits can be scheduled at 2–4 month intervals to determine phlebotomy needs; in those with high-risk PV receiving stable
 
HU dosage and/or IFN with very infrequent/absent phlebotomy needs, a 4- to 6-month interval may be appropriate. In low-risk ET patients, a visit at the 6- to 12-month interval is sufﬁcient, while for those with high-risk ET receiving cytoreduction, a 3- to 4-month interval is recommended. Clinical and laboratory evaluation should be more frequent in the initial phases of disease management until a stable phlebotomy rate and/or drug dose is achieved.
Most patients maintain their HU dose steadily for several years, although in a minority of patients, excessive myelosuppression may develop that requires dose adjustment. Routine chemistry as- sessment (including at least lipid panel, glucose, renal and hepatic function tests) is recommend at 1-year intervals. While an ultra- sound scan of the abdomen is suggested at ﬁrst visits to exclude subclinical splanchnic vein thrombosis or spleen infarcts, assess- ment of splenomegaly can be conveniently carried out by palpa- tion at each follow-up visit. Unless there is a suspicion of disease progression to post-PV/post-ET MF, there is no indication to
 


 
Criteria
PV	ET
Complete remission
 
A	Durable resolution of disease-related signs including palpable haepatosplenomegaly, large symptom improvement AND
B	Durable peripheral blood count remission, defined as HCT lower than 45% without phlebotomies; platelet count ≤400 × 109/l, WBC count
<10 × 109/l, AND
C	Without progressive disease, and absence of any haemorrhagic or thrombotic events, AND
D	Bone marrow histological remission defined as the presence of age-adjusted normal cellularity and disappearance of trilinear hyperplasia, and absence of >grade 1 reticulin fibrosis
Partial remission
A	Durable resolution of disease-related signs including palpable haepatosplenomegaly, large symptom improvement AND
B	Durable peripheral blood count remission, defined as HCT lower than 45% without phlebotomies; platelet count ≤400 × 109/l, WBC count
<10 × 109/l, AND
C	Without progressive disease, and absence of any haemorrhagic or thrombotic events, AND
D	Without bone marrow histological remission defined as persistence of trilinear hyperplasia
No response
 
Durable resolution of disease-related signs including palpable haepatosplenomegaly, large symptom improvement AND
Durable peripheral blood count remission, defined as platelet count
≤400 × 109/l, WBC count <10 × 109/l, absence of leukoerythroblastosis, AND
Without progressive disease, and absence of any haemorrhagic or thrombotic events, AND
Bone marrow histological remission defined as disappearance of megakaryocyte hyperplasia and absence of >grade 1 reticulin fibrosis


Durable resolution of disease-related signs including palpable haepatosplenomegaly, large symptom improvement AND
Durable peripheral blood count remission, defined as platelet count
≤400 × 109/l, WBC count <10 × 109/l, absence of leukoerythroblastosis, AND
Without progressive disease, and absence of any haemorrhagic or thrombotic events, AND
Without bone marrow histological remission defined as persistence of megakaryocyte hyperplasia
 
Any response that does not satisfy partial remission	Any response that does not satisfy partial remission
Progressive disease
 
Transformation into post-PV myelofibrosis, myelodysplastic syndrome or acute leukaemia
 
Transformation into post-PV myelofibrosis, myelodysplastic syndrome or acute leukaemia
 

Durable = lasting at least 12 weeks.
Large symptom improvement = a ≥10-point decrease in the Myeloproliferative Neoplasm-Symptom Assessment Form Total Symptom Score (MPN-SAF TSS) [62].
Molecular response is not required for assignment as complete or partial response. WBC, white blood cells; HCT, haematocrit; ELN, European LeukemiaNet.
Republished with permission of the American Society of Hematology, from [61]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
 
clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology

Response categories	Required criteria (benefit must last >12 weeks to qualify as a response) Complete remission (CR)	Bone marrow: age-adjusted normal cellularity; <5% blasts; ≤grade 1 fibrosis, and
Peripheral blood: Hb ≥100 g/l, and <UNL; neutrophil count ≥1× 109/l and <UNL; Platelets ≥100 × 109/l and <UNL; <2% immature myeloid cells, and
Clinical: resolution of disease symptoms; spleen and liver not palpable; no evidence of EMH
Partial remission (PR)	Peripheral blood: Hb ≥100 g/l, and <UNL; neutrophil count ≥1× 109/l and <UNL; platelets  ≥100  ×  109/l  and  <UNL;  <2%  immature  myeloid  cells,  and Clinical: resolution of disease symptoms; spleen and liver not palpable; no evidence of EMH, or Bone marrow: age-adjusted normal cellularity; <5% blasts; <grade 1 fibrosis, and
Peripheral blood: Hb ≥85 g/l but <100 g/l and <UNL; neutrophil count ≥1× 109/l and <UNL; platelets ≥50 × 109/l but
<100   ×   109/l   and   <UNL;   <2%   immature   myeloid   cells,   and Clinical: resolution of disease symptoms; spleen and liver not palpable; no evidence of EMH
Clinical improvement (CI)	The achievement of anaemia, spleen or symptom response without progressive disease or increase in severity of anaemia, thrombocytopaenia or neutropaenia
Anaemia response	Transfusion-independent patients: a >20 g/l increase in haemoglobin level
Transfusion-dependent patients: becoming transfusion-independent
Spleen response	A baseline splenomegaly that is palpable at 5–10 cm below the LCM becomes not palpable, or A baseline splenomegaly that is palpable at >10 cm below the LCM decreases by ≥50% A baseline splenomegaly that is palpable at <5 cm below the LCM is not eligible for spleen response A spleen response requires confirmation by MRI or CT showing ≥35% spleen volume reduction
Symptom response	A ≥50% reduction in the MPN-SAF TSS
Progressive disease	Appearance    of    a    new    splenomegaly    that    is    palpable    at    least    5    cm    below    the    LCM,    or A   ≥100%   increase   in   palpable   distance   below   LCM   for   baseline   splenomegaly   5–10   cm,   or A   50%   increase   in   palpable   distance   below   LCM   for   baseline   splenomegaly   of   >10   cm,   or Leukaemic      transformation      confirmed      by      a      bone      marrow      blast      count      of      ≥20%,      or A peripheral blood blast content of ≥20% associated with an absolute blast count of ≥1× 109/l that last for at least 2 weeks
Stable disease	Belonging to none of the above response categories
Relapse	No longer meeting criteria for at least a CI after achieving CR, PR or CI, or Loss of   anaemia   response   persisting   for at   least   1   month,   or Loss of spleen response persisting for at least 1 month
Cytogenetic remission	At least 10 metaphases must be analysed for cytogenetic response evaluation and requires confirmation by repeat testing within a 6-month window
CR:        eradication        of          a          pre-existing         abnormality PR:         ≥50%         reduction         in         abnormal         metaphases (PR applies only to patients with at least 10 abnormal metaphases at baseline)
Molecular remission	Molecular response evaluation must be analysed in peripheral blood granulocytes and requires confirmation by repeat testing within a 6-month window
CR: eradication of a pre-existing abnormality PR: >50% decrease in allele burden
(partial response applies only to patients with at least 20% mutant allele burden at baseline) Cytogenetic/molecular relapse	Re-emergence of a pre-existing cytogenetic or molecular abnormality that is confirmed by repeat testing
Grading of fibrosis is according to European scale (see Table 2).
Transfusion dependency before study enrolment is defined as transfusions of at least 6 units of packed red cells (PRBC), in the 12 weeks before study enrolment, for a haemoglobin level of <85 g/l, in the absence of bleeding or treatment-induced anaemia. In addition, the most recent transfusion episode must have occurred in the 28 days before study enrolment. Response in transfusion-dependent patients requires absence of any PRBC transfusions during any consecutive ‘rolling’ 12-week interval during the treatment phase, capped by a haemoglobin level of ≥85 g/l.
Spleen or liver responses must be confirmed by imaging studies where a ≥35% reduction in spleen volume, as assessed by MRI or CT, is required. Furthermore, a ≥35% volume reduction in the spleen or liver, by MRI or CT, constitutes a response regardless of what is reported with physical examination.
MPN-SAF TSS, MPN symptom self-assessment form total symptom score. This is assessed by the patients themselves and includes fatigue, concentration, early satiety, inactivity, night sweats, itching, bone pain, abdominal discomfort, weight loss and fevers, which are ranked each from 0 (absent/as good as it can be) to 10 (worst imaginable/as worst as it can be); the TSS is the summation of all individual scores (0–100 scale).
PMF, primary myelofibrosis; IWG-MRT, International Working Group for Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Research and Treatment; ELN, European Leukemia Net; UNL, upper normal limit; EMH, extra-medullary haematopoiesis; LCM, left costal margin; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; CT, computed tomography; Hb, haemoglobin.
Republished with permission of the American Society of Hematology, from [63]; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines

 
serially repeat BM biopsy. Also, outside a clinical study and with the exception of patients IFNs, repeated assessment of mutation burden is not recommended. For patients with MF, visits must be more frequent, ranging from every week to 3 months depend- ing on the general status, the presence of blood cell abnormalities and the type of therapy instituted. There is no ﬁrm evidence to suggest a speciﬁc type and/or frequency of follow-up; therefore, the above indications are mainly derived from experts’ experience.
Criteria for assessing the response to treatment have been developed by the ELN and the IWG-MRT (Table 6). The cri- teria for PV and ET include deﬁnitions of complete and partial remission, incorporating clinical, haematological and histological re- sponse assessments, including a standardised symptom assessment form [61]. In the case of PMF, the revised criteria include six re- sponse categories encompassing clinical and haematological
 
end points. Cytogenetic and molecular remissions, although considered, are not formally required for complete remission to be deﬁned (Table 7) [63]. However, these criteria have been developed mainly for use in the clinical trials setting, and there- fore should not be used as a tool to assess response to conven- tional therapies. In daily practice, the optimal but unvalidated target in ET include platelets <400 × 109/l [V]. On the other hand, the randomised, controlled CYTO-PV trial established the superiority of an HCT <45% as the goal of treatment of patients with PV [I, A] [24].
special situations
antithrombotic therapy. The prophylactic use of low-dose aspirin in PV and ET has been already discussed. In patients with MF and normal/increased platelet counts, the use of low-dose aspirin is not
 

 

(A)	Polycythaemia vera [66]
1.	Need for phlebotomy to keep HCT <45% after 3 months of at least 2 g/day of HU, OR
2.	Uncontrolled myeloproliferation, i.e. platelet count >400 × 109/l AND white blood cell count >10 × 109/l after 3 months of at least 2 g/day of HU, OR
3.	Failure to reduce massivea splenomegaly by more than 50% as measured by palpation, OR failure to completely relieve symptoms related to splenomegaly, after 3 months of at least 2 g/day of HU, OR
4.	Absolute neutrophil count <1.0 × 109/l OR platelet count <100 × 109/l OR Hb <100 g/l at the lowest dose of HU required to achieve a complete or partial clinicohaematological response, OR
5.	Presence of leg ulcers or other unacceptable HU-related non-haematological toxicities, such as mucocutaneous manifestations, gastrointestinal symptoms, pneumonitis or fever at any dose of HU
(B)	Essential thrombocythaemia [67]
•	Platelet count <600 × 109/l after 3 months of at least 2 g/day of HU (2.5 g/day in patients with a body weight >80 kg)
•	Platelet count <400 × 109/l and white blood cells <2500/µl at any dose of HU
•	Platelet count <400 × 109/l and Hb <10 g/dl at any dose of HU
•	Presence of leg ulcers or other unacceptable mucocutaneous manifestations at any dose of HU
•	HU-related fever
(C)	Primary myelofibrosis [66]
1.	Failure to: (i) reduce massivea or progressiveb splenomegaly or haepatomegaly in splenectomised patients, by more than 50% as measured by palpation, OR (ii) completely relieve symptoms of splenomegaly or haepatomegaly in splenectomised patients, after 3 months of at least 2 g/day of HU
2.	Uncontrolled myeloproliferation, i.e. platelet count >400 × 109/l AND white blood cell count >10 × 109/l after 3 months of at least 2 g/day of HU, OR
3.	Failure to reduce massivea splenomegaly by more than 50% as measured by palpation, OR failure to completely relieve symptoms related to splenomegaly, after 3 months of at least 2 g/day of HU, OR
4.	Absolute neutrophil count <1.0 × 109/l OR platelet count <50 × 109/l at the lowest dose of HU required to achieve a complete or major clinicohaematological response, OR
5.	Presence of leg ulcers or other unacceptable HU-related non-haematological toxicities, such as mucocutaneous manifestations, gastrointestinal symptoms, pneumonitis or fever at any dose of HU


aOrgan extending by more than 10 cm from the costal margin. bOrgan increasing by more than 3 cm in the last 3 months.
For (A), complete response was defined as: HCT <45% without phlebotomy, platelet count <400 × 109/l, white blood cell count <10 × 109/l and no disease- related symptoms. Partial response was defined as: HCT <45% without phlebotomy, or response in three or more of the other criteria [68].
For (C), complete response was defined as a complete response in anaemia, splenomegaly and constitutional symptoms; major response was defined as any response in anaemia and splenomegaly without progression in constitutional symptoms, OR complete response in anaemia (or partial response in anaemia that was transfusion-dependent), and response in constitutional symptoms without progression in splenomegaly, OR any response in splenomegaly and response in constitutional symptoms without progression in anaemia [69].
HCT,                haematocrit;                Hb,                 haemoglobin;                 HU,                 hydroxyurea. Reprinted from [66]. Copyright © 2010 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: Leukemia [67], copyright © 2007.
 
clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology
supported by clinical trials but may be appropriate considering a rate of thrombosis (fatal and non-fatal) of 1.75%, comparable with ET [64]. In patients who have already experienced major cardiovascular events, prevention of recurrence should be carried out according to general lines of management, depending on the type and site of previous thrombosis. In patients with splanchnic vein thrombosis or recurrent venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, lifelong oral anti-coagulation is usually suggested, although there is debate among experts in the absence of controlled studies [65]. The use of new anti-coagulants in these speciﬁc settings has not been evaluated yet. Indications for special situations are described below.

resistance or intolerance to ﬁrst-line cytoreductive agents: The phenomenon of HU resistance or intolerance, as deﬁned by the ELN (Table 8), is important. It identiﬁes a group of ET or PV patients with a poor prognosis [70, 71], who require a change of treatment, and for whom novel therapies such as JAK inhibitors may be attractive. We recommend options for management that include (in the face of HU resistance or modest intolerance): reducing the dose by adjusting therapeutic targets (e.g. raising the platelet count target to 600 × 109/l) or switch therapy, usually to IFN (PV, ET) or anagrelide (ET). Busulfan may also be employed, preferably in older patients. It is important to consider that when HU is used with (or succeeded by) other agents, including busulfan, it will signiﬁcantly increase the long-term risk of leukaemia [III, B]. Ruxolitinib has been approved for patients
 
with PV who are refactory or resistant to HU [I, A] [34].

leukaemic transformation: Treatment of blast-phase MPN is usually disappointing [72]. Acute leukaemia-like regimens can be used in patients who are potential candidates for alloSCT [IV, B] [72, 73]. Beneﬁts have been reported with azacitidine [IV, B] [74].

pregnancy: Current literature for pregnancy outcomes in MPN is sparse and likely to be subject to reporting bias. ET is the most common MPN in women of childbearing age. Maternal morbidity is uncommon in ET, but has been reported. Successful pregnancy occurs in up to 70% of patients. The literature regarding PV and MF, while very limited, is concordant with pregnancy outcome in ET. The suggested management of pregnancy in MPN derives mainly from a few single-centre studies [III, B] [75]. Disease management should be optimised before conception. HU and anagrelide should be stopped with an adequate wash-out period. If cytoreductive therapy is needed, IFN should be considered. Depending on the risk assessment results, women should be managed according to a standard-risk or high- risk pregnancy protocol, with multidisciplinary review. Unless contraindicated, all women should receive low-dose aspirin throughout pregnancy. For women with PV, venesection can be continued to maintain HCT levels within a gestation-appropriate target range, and is sufﬁcient for standard-risk pregnancy. For high-risk pregnancy, i.e. if one (or more) of the factors in Table 9 is present or is likely to occur during pregnancy, additional treatment including cytoreductive therapy with IFN and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) may be considered.
Foetal monitoring is suggested during pregnancy; scans should be carried out at 20, 26 and 34 weeks. Uterine artery
 
Doppler should be carried out at 20 weeks. In the presence of a mean pulsatility index >1.4, the pregnancy may be considered high risk and treatment can be escalated, along with additional growth scans, as appropriate.
Local protocols with regard to interruption of LMWH should be adhered to during labour, and dehydration should be avoided. Postpartum LMWH thromboprophylaxis for 6 weeks should be considered. Thrombosis has been documented in the postpartum period, and blood counts should be monitored at this time.
Breastfeeding is safe with low-dose aspirin, heparin and war- farin ( providing the new-born receives adequate vitamin K), but it is traditionally contraindicated with cytoreductive therapy. Decisions about breastfeeding while taking IFN should be made on an individual basis, after discussion regarding possible risks and beneﬁts [III, B].
hormonal therapy: An individualised risk beneﬁt assessment should be undertaken in considering hormonal therapy. The overall evidence grade is poor here [V]. For testosterone therapy, the major MPN-speciﬁc risk is of provoking an erythrocytosis which should be monitored. Concerning oestrogen and progesterone, the major risk is of thrombosis. In this case, topical therapies including coated intra-uterine devices are likely to be extremely low-risk and acceptable. For oral contraception, progesterone-only preparations are acceptable, but the combined oral contraceptive (i.e. both progesterone and oestrogen) is not recommended [V]. Where short-term hormonal manipulation is required, for example in fertility treatment, thromboprophylaxis should be considered and the patient should be counselled about thrombosis risk. Lastly, menopausal hormone replacement has recently been suggested to have minimal associated thrombosis
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines
practice guidelines development. The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 10. Statements without grading were considered justiﬁed standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.

conﬂict of interest
AMV has reported advisory board or lecture honoraria from Novartis, lecture honoraria from Shire and institutional research support from Novartis. TB has reported advisory board and lecture honoraria from Novartis. FC has reported advisory board and honoraria from Novartis, Gilead, CTI/Baxter and AOP Orphan Pharmaceuticals, and lecture honoraria from Novartis and CTI/Baxter. CH has received advisory board or lecture honoraria from Novartis, CTI, YM Bioscience, Sanoﬁ, Celgene, Gilead and Shire and institutional research support from Shire and Novartis. JJK has received advisory board or lecture honoraria from Novartis and Shire, and institutional re- search support from AOP Orphan Pharmaceuticals and Novartis. NK has reported advisory board and honoraria from Novartis and Sanoﬁ, lecture honoraria from Novartis and Sanoﬁ and institutional research support from Novartis and Sanoﬁ. JT has reported consultant or advisory roles and honoraria from Novartis, Incyte Corporation, AOP Orphan Pharmaceuticals and Sanoﬁ. CB has reported honoraria from Roche, Pﬁzer, Celgene, Pharmacyclics and Janssen and research grants from Roche and Janssen.
 
risk. An individual assessment weighing up the risks and need for treatment should be carried out.

surgery: Disease phenotype, individual patient variables and surgery-speciﬁc factors including choice of anaesthesia contribute to the personal risk of postoperative thrombosis and bleeding in MPN. Most of the data exist for ET patients, and arterial events
are increased postoperatively at ∼3.8%, but there is also a 10.5%
bleeding risk with surgery [77]. This side-effect is thought to be caused by a combination of disease-related primary platelet abnormalities, anti-platelet agents and anti-coagulant therapy. For this reason, careful preoperative review is required, with consideration given to temporary control of platelet counts (especially for procedures where there is a signiﬁcant risk if bleeding occurs or when patients are at increased risk of bleeding or thrombosis, as a consequence of the procedure). The use of anti-platelet and anti-coagulants should be adjusted according to local policy. Postoperative thromboprophylaxis with LMWH is recommended. It is not necessary to extend thromboprophylaxis beyond the normal period of time postoperatively simply because of an MPN diagnosis. Controlling blood counts preoperatively to standard targets for high-risk patients should be considered in MPN patients undergoing surgery, when bleeding is a risk or when thromboprophylaxis would normally be prescribed [IV, C].

methodology
These clinical practice guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for clinical
 

references
1.	Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL et al. WHO Classiﬁcation of Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Lyon: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 2008.
2.	Moulard O, Mehta J, Fryzek J et al. Epidemiology of myeloﬁbrosis, essential thrombocythemia, and polycythemia vera in the European Union. Eur J Haematol 2014; 92: 289–297.
3.	Titmarsh GJ, Duncombe AS, McMullin MF et al. How common are myeloproliferative neoplasms? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Hematol 2014; 89: 581–587.
4.	Cervantes F, Dupriez B, Passamonti F et al. Improving survival trends in primary myeloﬁbrosis: an international study. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 2981–2987.
5.	Tefferi A, Thiele J, Vannucchi AM, Barbui T. An overview on CALR and CSF3R mutations and a proposal for revision of WHO diagnostic criteria for myeloproliferative neoplasms. Leukemia 2014; 28: 1407–1413.
6.	Thiele J, Kvasnicka HM, Facchetti F et al. European consensus on grading bone marrow ﬁbrosis and assessment of cellularity. Haematologica 2005; 90: 1128–1132.
7.	Barosi G, Mesa RA, Thiele J et al. Proposed criteria for the diagnosis of post- polycythemia vera and post-essential thrombocythemia myeloﬁbrosis: a consensus statement from the International Working Group for Myeloﬁbrosis Research and Treatment. Leukemia 2008; 22: 437–438.
8.	Thiele J, Kvasnicka HM, Müllauer L et al. Essential thrombocythemia versus early primary myeloﬁbrosis: a multicenter study to validate the WHO classiﬁcation. Blood 2011; 117: 5710–5718.
9.	Gianelli U, Bossi A, Cortinovis I et al. Reproducibility of the WHO histological criteria for the diagnosis of Philadelphia chromosome-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms. Mod Pathol 2014; 27: 814–822.
10.	Madelung AB, Bondo H, Stamp I et al. World Health Organization-deﬁned classiﬁcation of myeloproliferative neoplasms: morphological reproducibility and
 
clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology

 
clinical correlations—the Danish experience. Am J Hematol 2013; 88: 1012–1016.
11.	Thiele J, Kvasnicka HM. The 2008 WHO diagnostic criteria for polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and primary myeloﬁbrosis. Curr Hematol Malig Rep 2009; 4: 33–40.
12.	Barbui T, Thiele J, Vannucchi AM, Tefferi A. Problems and pitfalls regarding WHO- deﬁned diagnosis of early/preﬁbrotic primary myeloﬁbrosis versus essential thrombocythemia. Leukemia 2013; 27: 1953–1958.
13.	Jovanovic JV, Ivey A, Vannucchi AM et al. Establishing optimal quantitative- polymerase chain reaction assays for routine diagnosis and tracking of minimal residual disease in JAK2-V617F-associated myeloproliferative neoplasms: a joint European LeukemiaNet/MPN&MPNr-EuroNet (COST action BM0902) study. Leukemia 2013; 27: 2032–2039.
14.	Passamonti F, Thiele J, Girodon F et al. A prognostic model to predict survival in 867 World Health Organization-deﬁned essential thrombocythemia at diagnosis: a study by the International Working Group on Myeloﬁbrosis Research and Treatment. Blood 2012; 120: 1197–1201.
15.	Tefferi A, Rumi E, Finazzi G et al. Survival and prognosis among 1545 patients with contemporary polycythemia vera: an international study. Leukemia 2013; 27: 1874–1881.
16.	Barbui T, Barosi G, Birgegard G et al. Philadelphia-negative classical myeloproliferative neoplasms: critical concepts and management recommendations from European LeukemiaNet. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 761–770.
17.	Marchioli R, Finazzi G, Landolﬁ R et al. Vascular and neoplastic risk in a large cohort of patients with polycythemia vera. J Clin Oncol 2005; 23: 2224–2232.
18.	Cervantes F, Dupriez B, Pereira A et al. New prognostic scoring system for primary myeloﬁbrosis based on a study of the International Working Group for Myeloﬁbrosis Research and Treatment. Blood 2009; 113: 2895–2901.
19.	Passamonti F, Cervantes F, Vannucchi AM et al. A dynamic prognostic model to predict survival in primary myeloﬁbrosis: a study by the IWG-MRT (International Working Group for Myeloproliferative Neoplasms Research and Treatment). Blood 2010; 115: 1703–1708.
20.	Gangat N, Caramazza D, Vaidya R et al. DIPSS Plus: a reﬁned Dynamic International Prognostic Scoring System for primary myeloﬁbrosis that incorporates prognostic information from karyotype, platelet count, and transfusion status. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 392–397.
21.	Rumi E, Pietra D, Pascutto C et al. Clinical effect of driver mutations of JAK2, CALR or MPL in primary myeloﬁbrosis. Blood 2014; 124: 1062–1069.
22.	Vannucchi AM, Lasho TL, Guglielmelli P et al. Mutations and prognosis in primary myeloﬁbrosis. Leukemia 2013; 27: 1861–1869.
23.	Hernández-Boluda JC, Pereira A, Gómez M et al. The International Prognostic Scoring System does not accurately discriminate different risk categories in patients with post-essential thrombocythemia and post-polycythemia vera myeloﬁbrosis. Haematologica 2014; 99: e55–e57.
24.	Marchioli R, Finazzi G, Specchia G et al. Cardiovascular events and intensity of treatment in polycythemia vera. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 22–33.
25.	Landolﬁ R, Marchioli R, Kutti J et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of low-dose aspirin in polycythemia vera. N Engl J Med 2004; 350: 114–124.
26.	Kiladjian JJ, Chevret S, Dosquet C et al. Treatment of polycythemia vera with hydroxyurea and pipobroman: ﬁnal results of a randomized trial initiated in 1980. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 3907–3913.
27.	Björkholm M, Derolf AR, Hultcrantz M et al. Treatment-related risk factors for transformation to acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes in myeloproliferative neoplasms. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 2410–2415.
28.	Kiladjian JJ, Cassinat B, Chevret S et al. Pegylated interferon-alfa-2a induces complete hematologic and molecular responses with low toxicity in polycythemia vera. Blood 2008; 112: 3065–3072.
29.	Quintás-Cardama A, Kantarjian H, Manshouri T et al. Pegylated interferon alfa-2a yields high rates of hematologic and molecular response in patients with advanced essential thrombocythemia and polycythemia vera. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 5418–5424.
30.	Kiladjian JJ, Mesa RA, Hoffman R. The renaissance of interferon therapy for the treatment of myeloid malignancies. Blood 2011; 117: 4706–4715.
31.	Mesa RA, Niblack J, Wadleigh M et al. The burden of fatigue and quality of life in myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs): an international internet-based survey of 1179 MPD patients. Cancer 2007; 109: 68–76.
 
32.	Tefferi A. JAK inhibitors for myeloproliferative neoplasms: clarifying facts from myths. Blood 2012; 119: 2721–2730.
33.	Finazzi G, Caruso V, Marchioli R et al. Acute leukemia in polycythemia vera: an analysis of 1638 patients enrolled in a prospective observational study. Blood 2005; 105: 2664–2670.
34.	Vannucchi AM, Kiladjian JJ, Griesshammer M et al. Ruxolitinib proves superior to best available therapy in a prospective, randomized, phase 3 study (RESPONSE) in patients with polycythemia vera resistant to or intolerant of hydroxyurea. EHA Annual Meeting 2014; LB2436.
35.	Tefferi A. Polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia: 2013 update on diagnosis, risk-stratiﬁcation, and management. Am J Hematol 2013; 88: 507–516.
36.	Alvarez-Larrán A, Cervantes F, Pereira A et al. Observation versus antiplatelet therapy as primary prophylaxis for thrombosis in low-risk essential thrombocythemia. Blood 2010; 116: 1205–1210.
37.	Cortelazzo S, Finazzi G, Ruggeri M et al. Hydroxyurea for patients with essential throm- bocythemia and a high risk of thrombosis. N Engl J Med 1995; 332: 1132–1136.
38.	Harrison CN, Campbell PJ, Buck G et al. Hydroxyurea compared with anagrelide in high-risk essential thrombocythemia. N Engl J Med 2005; 353: 33–45.
39.	Gisslinger H, Gotic M, Holowiecki J et al. Anagrelide compared to hydroxyurea in WHO-classiﬁed essential thrombocythemia: the ANAHYDRET Study, a randomized controlled trial. Blood 2013; 121: 1720–1728.
40.	Cervantes F, Alvarez-Larrán A, Hernández-Boluda JC et al. Erythropoietin treatment of the anaemia of myeloﬁbrosis with myeloid metaplasia: results in 20 patients and review of the literature. Br J Haematol 2004; 127: 399–403.
41.	Cervantes F, Alvarez-Larrán A, Hernández-Boluda JC et al. Darbepoetin-alpha for the anaemia of myeloﬁbrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Br J Haematol 2006; 134: 184–186.
42.	Cervantes F, Alvarez-Larrán A, Domingo A et al. Efﬁcacy and tolerability of danazol as a treatment for the anaemia of myeloﬁbrosis with myeloid metaplasia: long- term results in 30 patients. Br J Haematol 2005; 129: 771–775.
43.	Mesa RA, Steensma DP, Pardanani A et al. A phase 2 trial of combination low- dose thalidomide and prednisone for the treatment of myeloﬁbrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Blood 2003; 101: 2534–2541.
44.	Mesa RA, Yao X, Cripe LD et al. Lenalidomide and prednisone for myeloﬁbrosis: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) phase 2 trial E4903. Blood 2010; 116: 4436–4438.
45.	Tefferi A, Lasho TL, Mesa RA et al. Lenalidomide therapy in del(5)(q31)-associated myeloﬁbrosis: cytogenetic and JAK2V617F molecular remissions. Leukemia 2007; 21: 1827–1828.
46.	Tefferi A, Mesa RA, Nagorney DM et al. Splenectomy in myeloﬁbrosis with myeloid metaplasia: a single-institution experience with 223 patients. Blood 2000; 95: 2226–2233.
47.	Martinez-Trillos A, Gaya A, Mafﬁoli M et al. Efﬁcacy and tolerability of hydroxyurea in the treatment of the hyperproliferative manifestations of myeloﬁbrosis: results in 40 patients. Ann Hematol 2010; 89: 1233–1237.
48.	Bouabdallah R, Coso D, Gonzague-Casabianca L et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of splenic irradiation in the treatment of patients with idiopathic myeloﬁbrosis: a report on 15 patients. Leuk Res 2000; 24: 491–495.
49.	Steensma DP, Hook CC, Stafford SL, Tefferi A. Low-dose, single-fraction, whole- lung radiotherapy for pulmonary hypertension associated with myeloﬁbrosis with myeloid metaplasia. Br J Haematol 2002; 118: 813–816.
50.	Verstovsek S, Kantarjian H, Mesa RA et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of INCB018424, a JAK1 and JAK2 inhibitor, in myeloﬁbrosis. N Engl J Med 2010; 363: 1117–1127.
51.	Tefferi A, Pardanani A. Serious adverse events during ruxolitinib treatment discontinuation in patients with myeloﬁbrosis. Mayo Clin Proc 2011; 86: 1188–1191.
52.	Verstovsek S, Mesa RA, Gotlib J et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of ruxolitinib for myeloﬁbrosis. N Engl J Med 2012; 366: 799–807.
53.	Harrison C, Kiladjian JJ, Al-Ali HK et al. JAK inhibition with ruxolitinib versus best available therapy for myeloﬁbrosis. N Engl J Med 2012; 366: 787–798.
54.	Cervantes F, Vannucchi AM, Kiladjian JJ et al. Three-year efﬁcacy, safety, and survival ﬁndings from COMFORT-II, a phase 3 study comparing ruxolitinib with best available therapy for myeloﬁbrosis. Blood 2013; 122: 4047–4053.
55.	Verstovsek S, Kantarjian HM, Estrov Z et al. Long term outcomes of 107 patients with myeloﬁbrosis receiving JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor ruxolitinib: survival advantage in comparison to matched historical controls. Blood 2012; 120: 1202–1209.
 
Annals of Oncology	clinical practice guidelines

 
56.	Passamonti F, Mafﬁoli M, Cervantes F et al. Impact of ruxolitinib on the natural history of primary myeloﬁbrosis: a comparison of the DIPSS and the COMFORT-2 cohorts. Blood 2014; 123: 1833–1835.
57.	Kröger N, Holler E, Kobbe G et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation after reduced-intensity conditioning in patients with myeloﬁbrosis: a prospective, multicenter study of the Chronic Leukemia Working Party of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Blood 2009; 114: 5264–5270.
58.	Ballen KK, Shrestha S, Sobocinski KA et al. Outcome of transplantation for myeloﬁbrosis. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2010; 16: 358–367.
59.	Lussana F, Rambaldi A, Finazzi MC et al. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in patients with polycythemia vera or essential thrombocythemia transformed to myeloﬁbrosis or acute myeloid leukemia: a report from the MPN Subcommittee of the Chronic Malignancies Working Party of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Haematologica 2014; 99: 916–921.
60.	Rondelli D, Goldberg JD, Isola L et al. MPD-RC 101 prospective study of reduced intensity allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in patients with myeloﬁbrosis. Blood 2014; 124: 1183–1191.
61.	Barosi G, Mesa R, Finazzi G et al. Revised response criteria for polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia: an ELN and IWG-MRT consensus project. Blood 2013; 121: 4778–4781.
62.	Emanuel RM, Dueck AC, Geyer HL et al. Myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) symptom assessment form total symptom score: prospective international assessment of an abbreviated symptom burden scoring system among patients with MPNs. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 4098–4103.
63.	Tefferi A, Cervantes F, Mesa R et al. Revised response criteria for myeloﬁbrosis: International Working Group-Myeloproliferative Neoplasms Research and Treatment (IWG-MRT) and European LeukemiaNet (ELN) consensus report. Blood 2013; 122: 1395–1398.
64.	Barbui T, Carobbio A, Cervantes F et al. Thrombosis in primary myeloﬁbrosis: incidence and risk factors. Blood 2010; 115: 778–782.
65.	Ellis MH, Lavi N, Vannucchi A, Harrison C. Treatment of thromboembolic events coincident with the diagnosis of myeloproliferative neoplasms: a physician survey. Thromb Res 2014; 134: 251–254.
66.	Barosi G, Birgegard G, Finazzi G et al. A uniﬁed deﬁnition of clinical resistance and intolerance to hydroxycarbamide in polycythaemia vera and primary myeloﬁbrosis: results of a European LeukemiaNet (ELN) consensus process. Br J Haematol 2010; 148: 961–963.
 
67.	Barosi G, Besses C, Birgegard G et al. A uniﬁed deﬁnition of clinical resistance/ intolerance to hydroxyurea in essential thrombocythemia: results of a consensus process by an international working group. Leukemia 2007; 21: 277–280.
68.	Barosi G, Birgegard G, Finazzi G et al. Response criteria for essential thrombocythemia and polycythemia vera: result of a European LeukemiaNet consensus conference. Blood 2009; 113: 4829–4833.
69.	Barosi G, Bordessoule D, Briere J et al. Response criteria for myeloﬁbrosis with myeloid metaplasia: results of an initiative of the European Myeloﬁbrosis Network (EUMNET). Blood 2005; 106: 2849–2853.
70.	Alvarez-Larrán A, Pereira A, Cervantes F et al. Assessment and prognostic value of the European LeukemiaNet criteria for clinicohematologic response, resistance, and intolerance to hydroxyurea in polycythemia vera. Blood 2012; 119: 1363–1369.
71.	Hernández-Boluda JC, Alvarez-Larrán A, Gómez M et al. Clinical evaluation of the European LeukaemiaNet criteria for clinicohaematological response and resistance/ intolerance to hydroxycarbamide in essential thrombocythaemia. Br J Haematol 2011; 152: 81–88.
72.	Kennedy JA, Atenafu EG, Messner HA et al. Treatment outcomes following leukemic transformation in Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms. Blood 2013; 121: 2725–2733.
73.	Alchalby H, Zabelina T, Stubig T et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation for myeloﬁbrosis with leukemic transformation: a study from the Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Subcommittee of the CMWP of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2014; 20: 279–281.
74.	Thepot S, Itzykson R, Seegers V et al. Treatment of progression of Philadelphia- negative myeloproliferative neoplasms to myelodysplastic syndrome or acute myeloid leukemia by azacitidine: a report on 54 cases on the behalf of the Groupe Francophone des Myelodysplasies (GFM). Blood 2010; 116: 3735–3742.
75.	Harrison CN, Robinson SE. Myeloproliferative disorders in pregnancy. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 2011; 25: 261–275.
76.	Harrison C. Pregnancy and its management in the Philadelphia negative myeloproliferative diseases. Br J Haematol 2005; 129: 293–306.
77.	Ruggeri M, Rodeghiero F, Tosetto A et al. Postsurgery outcomes in patients with polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia: a retrospective survey. Blood 2008; 111: 666–671.
78.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
