clinical practice guidelines	Annals of Oncology 27 (Supplement 5): v119–v133, 2016

2016 MASCC and ESMO guideline update for the prevention of chemotherapy- and radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and of nausea and vomiting in advanced cancer patients
F. Roila1, A. Molassiotis2, J. Herrstedt3, M. Aapro4, R. J. Gralla5, E. Bruera6, R. A. Clark-Snow7,
L. L. Dupuis8, L. H. Einhorn9, P. Feyer10, P. J. Hesketh11, K. Jordan12, I. Olver13, B. L. Rapoport14,
J. Roscoe15, C. H. Ruhlmann3, D. Walsh16, D. Warr17 & M. van der Wetering18 on behalf of the participants of the MASCC/ESMO Consensus Conference Copenhagen 2015*
1Medical Oncology, Santa Maria Hospital, Terni, Italy; 2School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China SAR; 3Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark; 4Clinique de Genolier, Multidisciplinary Oncology Institute, Genolier, Switzerland; 5Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Jacobi Medical Center, New York; 6Department of Palliative, Rehabilitation and Integrative Medicine, UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston; 7The University of Kansas Cancer Center, Westwood, Kansas, USA; 8Department of Pharmacy and Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; 9Division of Hematology–Oncology, Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University, Indianapolis, USA; 10Department of Radiation Oncology, Vivantes Clinics, Neukoelln, Berlin, Germany; 11Lahey Health Cancer Institute, Burlington, USA; 12Department of Hematology/Oncology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittemberg, Halle, Germany; 13Sansom Institute for Health Research, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia; 14Medical Oncology Centre of Rosebank, Johannesburg, South Africa; 15Department of Surgery, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, USA; 16Academic Department of Palliative Medicine, Our Lady’s Hospice and Care Services, Dublin, Ireland; 17Cancer Clinical Research Unit, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada; 18Department of Paediatric Oncology, Emma Children’s Hospital/Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands



 
introduction
Despite the considerable progress achieved in the last 30 years, vomiting and, especially, nausea, continue to be two of the most distressing side-effects of cancer chemotherapy. In the late 1990s, several professional organisations published recommen- dations on the optimal antiemetic prophylaxis in patients sub- mitted to chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy. The European Society of Medical Oncology (ESMO) and the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer (MASCC) published the results of the third Consensus Conference on antiemetics held in Perugia in June 2009 in Annals of Oncology in 2010 [1]. An update of these recommendations, including studies pub- lished from 1 January 2009 to 30 June 2015, was discussed in Copenhagen in June 2015 and is presented in this paper. The methodology for the guideline process is described in detail in the 2010 publication [1]. To change a 2010 recommendation or for a new guideline recommendation to be accepted, a consensus of at least 67% of the expert panellists was needed. As a general rule, the panel considered changes of 10% or greater to be sufﬁ- cient to warrant the changing of a recommendation.
ESMO    levels    of    Evidence    [I–V]    and    Grades    of
Recommendation [A–D] are given according to the ESMO- adapted version of the grading of the Infectious Diseases Society

*Correspondence to: c/o ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Luigi Taddei, 4, 6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org and/ or to The MASCC Ofﬁce. E-mail: aschultz@mascc.org
 
of America. The MASCC Levels of Scientiﬁc Conﬁdence was classiﬁed as
-	high: repeated, randomised trials that were appropriately sized and well conducted
-	moderate: at least one randomised trial, supported by well- conducted, phase II trials, or possibly several well-conducted phase II studies;
-	low: formal clinical trials of a level less than that expressed above;
-	very low: clinical impression only;
-	no conﬁdence possible.
The MASCC Levels of Consensus are given as high, moderate or low.

levels of emetogenicity
The emetogenicity of chemotherapy agents is used as a frame- work for deﬁning antiemetic treatment guidelines. In the past, a number of classiﬁcations have been proposed in which chemo- therapy agents have been divided into three to ﬁve emetogenic levels. The literature has provided a very limited source of useful information in the development of these classiﬁcations, given the imprecise, inconsistent and extremely limited ways in which information on emesis and nausea has been recorded in most therapeutic trials. Most classiﬁcations have not differentiated between the various types of emesis, such as acute, delayed, breakthrough and anticipatory, and few have accounted for im- portant treatment- and patient-related variables, such as
 

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
chemotherapy dose, rate and route of administration, gender, age and history of alcohol consumption.
A four-level classiﬁcation of intravenous (i.v.) chemotherapy
agents has been accepted by registration authorities and groups producing recommendations on antiemetics: high (emetic risk
>90%), moderate (30%–90%), low (10%–30%), and minimal
(<10%) [2]. However, the broad range of expected emesis in the moderate level has posed an increasing challenge to efforts to provide a single recommendation for antiemetic treatment ap- propriate for the entire moderate category [3].
Numerous new antineoplastic agents, especially oral agents, have been introduced since the last MASCC/ESMO antiemetic guideline update, and have to be incorporated into the emeto- genic classiﬁcation. Such efforts continue to be hampered by the limited recording of ‘common’ toxicities such as emesis during antineoplastic drug development and the unregulated use of prophylactic antiemetics during antineoplastic drug develop- ment even before the emetogenicity of the agents is established. Furthermore, information might be incomplete or uninterpret- able when only severe vomiting or nausea or combined nausea and vomiting are listed. Patients in trials with new agents are often heavily pretreated with other antitumour agents and there- fore may also be more prone to develop emesis. Many agents tend to be used in extended regimens of daily oral use, and therefore, we decided that for oral agents, the emetic potential was based upon a full course of therapy and not a single dose.
A systematic search identiﬁed 42 new antineoplastic agents and 168 studies could be extracted in the established period. There was adequate evidence to allow 41 of 42 new agents to be classiﬁed in alphabetical order and according to emetogenic risk (Table 1). This represents a change from prior MASCC/ESMO antiemetic guide- line updates as the relative emetogenicity of agents within a given emetic level is not shown because of the mentioned constraints.
No new highly emetogenic agents were identiﬁed. Seven new moderately emetogenic agents were identiﬁed (i.v.: temozolo- mide, trabectedin, romidepsin, thiotepa; oral: bosutinib, crizoti- nib, ceritinib). Twenty-six new agents were classiﬁed as having a low emetogenic risk potential (i.v.: aﬂibercept, belinostat, blinatu- momab, brentuximab, cabazitaxel, carﬁlzomib, eribulin, ipilimu- mab, nab-paclitaxel, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, pertuzumab, trastuzumab-emtansine, vinﬂunine; oral: afatinib, axatinib, dabrafenib, dasatinib, ibrutinib, idelalisib, nilotinib, ola- parib, pazopanib, ponatinib, regorafenib, vandetanib, vorinostat). Finally, eight new agents were classiﬁed as minimally emetogenic (i.v.: nivolumab, ofatumumab, pembrolizumab, pixantrone; oral: pomalidomide, ruxolitinib, vemurafenib, vismodegib). The emetic risk classiﬁcation only refers to adult patients.
The update committee also recommended reclassiﬁcation of the combined anthracycline–cyclophosphamide (AC) regimen for breast cancer patients as a special category within highly emetogenic, because delayed phase treatment is different from cisplatin regimens.

prevention of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting induced by highly emetogenic chemotherapy
Previous MASCC/ESMO consensus guidelines recommended a three-drug regimen including single doses of a 5-HT3-receptor
 
antagonist (RA), dexamethasone and aprepitant given before chemotherapy to prevent acute nausea and vomiting following chemotherapy of high emetic risk and dexamethasone plus aprepitant or aprepitant alone to prevent delayed nausea and vomiting in cisplatin-treated/ and AC-treated patients, respect- ively [1]. Since then two new neurokinin (NK)1 RAs, netupitant and rolapitant, have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA, netupitant as NEPA combined with palo- nosetron and rolapitant) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA, netupitant as NEPA combined with palonosetron) and an i.v. formulation of aprepitant, fosaprepitant, has been mar- keted.

cisplatin-treated patients
Five studies have been carried out since 2009. A double-blind, randomised, non-inferiority study compared the efﬁcacy and tolerability of a single i.v. dose of fosaprepitant (150 mg), with the 3-day oral aprepitant administration in 2247 cancer patients submitted to cisplatin-based chemotherapy [4]. The complete response rate (no vomiting and no rescue treatment) was not signiﬁcantly inferior with fosaprepitant compared with aprepi- tant. In particular, complete response was achieved in 89.0% versus 88.0% of patients on day 1, in 74.3% versus 74.2% on
days 2–5 and in 71.9% versus 72.3% on days 1–5, respectively.
Subsequent studies conﬁrmed the equal efﬁcacy of the 150 mg single i.v. dose of fosaprepitant [5] and the 3-day oral regimen of aprepitant in cisplatin-based chemotherapy [6].
NEPA, an oral combination of the NK1 RA, netupitant, and the 5-HT3 RA, palonosetron, has been evaluated in a rando- mised, double-blind, dose-ranging phase II study in 694 cis- platin-treated patients [7]. Three different oral doses of netupitant (100, 200 and 300 mg) plus oral palonosetron
0.50 mg were compared with oral palonosetron 0.50 mg, all given on day 1. A standard 3-day oral aprepitant regimen plus a single i.v. dose of ondansetron 32 mg was included as an ex- ploratory arm. In the NEPA and aprepitant arms, patients received 12 mg oral dexamethasone on day 1 and 4 mg twice daily on days 2–4 and in the palonosetron arm, the dose of dexa- methasone was 20 mg orally day 1 followed by 8 mg twice daily on days 2–4. The primary end point was complete response on days 1–5 which was signiﬁcantly superior with all NEPA doses with respect to palonosetron (87.4% NEPA100, 87.6% NEPA200, and 89.6% NEPA300 and 76.5% with palonosetron), while com- plete response was achieved in 86.6% of patients receiving apre- pitant and ondansetron. Complete response on days 2–5 was also signiﬁcantly superior in the NEPA (and aprepitant) arms compared with palonosetron. On day 1, the complete response was 93.3%, 92.7% and 98.5%, respectively, versus 89.7% with palonosetron and 94.8% with aprepitant and ondansetron. On day 1, only NEPA 300 mg and aprepitant plus ondansetron were signiﬁcantly superior to palonosetron alone. Therefore, a dose of 300 mg NEPA was selected for the phase III trial carried out in cisplatin and AC-treated cancer patients.
A randomised, double-blind, dose-ﬁnding study carried out in 454 patients submitted to cisplatin evaluated four different oral doses of rolapitant (9, 22.5, 90 and 180 mg respectively) in comparison with placebo, all combined with i.v. ondansetron 32 mg and oral dexamethasone 20 mg on day 1 followed by dexamethasone 8 mg twice daily on days 2–4 [8]. The primary
 

 
IV chemotherapy	Oral chemotherapya
 
High	Anthracycline/cyclophosphamide combinationb Carmustine
Cisplatin         Cyclophosphamide ≥1500 mg/m2 Dacarbazine
Mechlorethamine Streptozocin
Moderate	Alemtuzumab Azacitidine Bendamustine Carboplatin Clofarabine
Cyclophosphamide <1500 mg/m2 Cytarabine >1000 mg/m2 Daunorubicin
Doxorubicin
Low	Aflibercept
Belinostat Blinatumomab Bortezomib Brentuximab Cabazitaxel Carfilzomib Catumaxumab Cetuximab
Cytarabine ≤1000 mg/m2
Docetaxel Eribulin Etoposide
5-Fluorouracil Gemcitabine








Minimal	Bevacizumab Bleomycin Busulfan
2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine Cladribine
Fludarabine Nivolumab Ofatumumab
 









Epirubicin Idarubicin Ifosfamide Irinotecan Oxaliplatin Romidepsin Temozolomidec Thiotepad Trabectedin
Ipilimumab Ixabepilone Methotrexate Mitomycin Mitoxantrone Nab-paclitaxel Paclitaxel Panitumumab Pemetrexed
Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin Pertuzumab
Temsirolimus Topotecan Trastuzumab-emtansine Vinflunine








Pembrolizumab Pixantrone Pralatrexate Rituximab Trastuzumab Vinblastine Vincristine Vinorelbine
 
Hexamethylmelamine Procarbazine






Bosutinib Ceritinib Crizotinib
Cyclophosphamide Imatinib Temozolomide Vinorelbine


Afatinib Axatinib Capecitabine Dabrafenib Dasatinib Everolimus Etoposide Fludarabine Ibrutinib Idelalisib Lapatinib Lenalidomide Olaparib Nilotinib Pazopanib Ponatinib Regorafenib Sunitinib Tegafur uracil Thalidomide Vandetanib Vorinostat
Chlorambucil Erlotinib Gefitinib Hydroxyurea Melphalan Methotrexate
L-phenylalanine mustard
Pomalidomide Ruxolitinib Sorafenib
6-Thioguanine Vemurafenib Vismodegib
 

aClassified   emetic    potential    of    oral    agents    based    upon    a    full    course    of    therapy   and    not    a    single    dose. bThe combination of an anthracycline and cyclophosphamide in patients with breast cancer should be considered highly emetogenic.
cNo direct evidence found for temozolomide i.v.; as all sources indicate a similar safety profile to the oral formulation, the classification was based on oral temozolomide.
dClassification refers to individual evidence from paediatric trials.
 
end point was complete response on days 1–5 which was signiﬁ- cantly increased with all doses of rolapitant. The greatest beneﬁt was observed with rolapitant 180 mg (62.5% versus 46.7% on days 1–5, 87.6% versus 66.7% on day 1 and 63.6 versus 48.9 on days 2–5), and this dose was selected for the phase III studies.
Two phase III studies (HEC-1 and HEC-2), published as a single paper, have evaluated rolapitant in cisplatin-treated patients [9]. The two phase III studies had the same design and compared a combination of granisetron 10 µg/kg i.v. and oral dexamethasone 20 mg on day 1 and 8 mg twice daily on days 2– 4 with granisetron and dexamethasone in the same doses and schedules plus rolapitant 180 mg orally. The dose of dexametha- sone was not reduced in the experimental arm because rolapi- tant is not an inducer or inhibitor of CYP3A4. The primary end point of these studies was the complete response on days 2–5 which was signiﬁcantly superior in the rolapitant arms in both studies (HEC-1 73% versus 58% and HEC-2 70% versus 62%). Complete responses on day 1 and days 1–5 were also signiﬁcant- ly superior with rolapitant in the HEC-1 study (84% versus 74% and 70% versus 56%), but not in the HEC-2 study (83% versus 79% and 68% versus 60%). Combining data from these two trials, the addition of rolapitant signiﬁcantly improved the effect of granisetron plus dexamethasone compared with placebo in all primary and secondary end points.
In conclusion, the addition of an NK1 RA in patients receiv- ing cisplatin chemotherapy increased the complete response on day 1 by 4%–14%, on days 2–5 by 8%–21% and on days 1–5 by 8%–20% [1, 7, 9]. This increase is not only statistically signiﬁ- cant but also clinically relevant because of the potential positive impact on the rates of complete response achieved in the ﬁrst cycle on the subsequent cycles of chemotherapy. The magnitude of the differences observed between the studies could be affected by differences in the control arm (e.g. differences in 5-HT3 RA used). Furthermore, part of the antiemetic effect on days 2–5 could also be due to a dependence effect from day 1 (the better the results obtained on day 1, the higher the chance of complete responses on days 2–5). Therefore, for the prevention of non- AC highly emetogenic chemotherapy, a three-drug regimen in- cluding single doses of a 5-HT3 RA, dexamethasone and an NK1 RA (aprepitant, fosaprepitant, netupitant or rolapitant), given before chemotherapy is recommended [MASCC level of conﬁ- dence: high; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence I; ESMO grade of recommendation: A]. In patients re- ceiving non-AC highly emetogenic chemotherapy treated with a combination of an NK1 RA, a 5-HT3 RA and dexamethasone to prevent acute nausea and vomiting, dexamethasone on days 2–4 is suggested to prevent delayed nausea and vomiting [MASCC level of conﬁdence: high; MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence I; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].
Recently, a double-blind study, speciﬁcally designed to inves-
tigate cisplatin-induced delayed nausea and vomiting, compared the effect of aprepitant with metoclopramide in 303 chemother- apy-naïve patients receiving the same antiemetic prophylaxis on day 1 consisting of i.v. palonosetron 0.25 mg, dexamethasone 12 mg and oral aprepitant 125 mg before chemotherapy [10]. Patients were randomised to oral dexamethasone 8 mg (days 2– 4) plus oral aprepitant 80 mg (days 2–3) or to oral metoclopra- mide 20 mg four times daily plus oral dexamethasone 8 mg twice daily (both days 2–4). Complete response on days 2–5 was
 
the primary end point. No signiﬁcant differences were observed on day 1. On days 2–5, the complete response rates were not sig- niﬁcantly different (80.3% with aprepitant plus dexamethasone versus 82.5% with metoclopramide plus dexamethasone). Also no signiﬁcant differences were observed with respect to the sec- ondary efﬁcacy end point and toxicity. Therefore, if aprepitant 125 mg is used on day 1, then dexamethasone 8 mg × 1 (days 2– 4) + aprepitant 80   mg × 1   (days   2–3)   or   dexamethasone 8 mg × 2 (days 2–4) + metoclopramide 20 mg × 4 (days 2–4) is recommended. Note that this dosage of metoclopramide derives from the results of the phase III study mentioned above and some regulatory authorities like the EMA now recommend a maximum of 0.5 mg/kg total daily dose.
These changes aim mainly to reduce the risk of neurological side-effects.

AC-treated female patients with breast cancer
Two studies have been carried out since 2009. A randomised double-blind phase III study in 1455 patients (98% with breast cancer), undergoing AC chemotherapy compared NEPA (oral netupitant 300 mg and palonosetron 0.5 mg) plus oral dexa- methasone 12 mg with oral palonosetron 0.5 mg plus oral dexa- methasone 20 mg [11]. The primary end point was the complete response achieved during the delayed phase which was signiﬁ- cantly superior with netupitant (76.9% versus 69.5%). Even complete response on day 1 (88.4% versus 85.0%) and on days 1–5 (74.3% versus 66.6%) were signiﬁcantly superior with the addition of netupitant. Although the beneﬁt was <10% as con- cerns both the primary and secondary efﬁcacy parameters, these differences seem to be clinically relevant, because a signiﬁcantly higher number of patients in the NEPA arm reported that nausea and vomiting had no impact on daily living when com- pared with patients in the palonosetron arm.
A randomised, double-blind phase III study in 1369 patients submitted to a combination of AC or non-AC moderately eme- togenic chemotherapy (MEC) evaluated rolapitant [12]. Oral granisetron (2 mg daily on days 1–3) and dexamethasone (20 mg on day 1) were compared with oral rolapitant (180 mg on day 1) plus oral granisetron and dexamethasone in the same doses and schedules as in the control arm. The primary end point was complete response on days 2–5. Protocol-speciﬁed subgroup analysis in women with breast cancer receiving AC (53%) and patients of different diagnosis receiving non-AC (47%) chemotherapy was planned. Rolapitant signiﬁcantly improved the effect of granisetron and dexamethasone both in the entire population and in women with breast cancer receiving AC chemotherapy; complete response on days 2–5 was achieved by 71% versus 62% of the total population and by 67% versus 60% of AC-treated patients. Also the rates of patients obtaining a complete response on days 1–5 were signiﬁcantly improved by rolapitant in the entire population and in the AC subgroup, whereas no signiﬁcant difference was seen on day 1 in either group [12].
Therefore, the addition of an NK1 RA in patients receiving AC chemotherapy for breast cancer increased the complete re- sponse on day 1 by 0%–7%, on days 2–5 by 6%–9% and on days 1–5 by 8%–9% [1, 11, 12]. The improvement in the delayed and overall phases is not only statistically signiﬁcant but also
 
clinically relevant because of the potential positive impact on the complete response rates in the subsequent cycles of chemo- therapy. Similar to the cisplatin studies, the differences in the magnitude of beneﬁt could be inﬂuenced by differences in the control arm. Also as with the cisplatin-based studies, none of the AC chemotherapy studies were designed speciﬁcally for the investigation of delayed nausea and vomiting, and a carry-over effect of a day 1 difference cannot be excluded.
In conclusion, in women with breast cancer receiving AC chemotherapy, a three-drug regimen including single doses of a 5-HT3 RA, dexamethasone and an NK1 RA (aprepitant, fosapre- pitant, netupitant or rolapitant), given before chemotherapy is recommended [MASCC level of conﬁdence: high; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence I; ESMO grade of recommendation: A].
A randomised double-blind study evaluated aprepitant versus dexamethasone for the prophylaxis of delayed emesis in 580 chemotherapy-naïve women with breast cancer, who received adjuvant AC and i.v. palonosetron 0.25 mg, dexamethasone 8 mg and oral aprepitant 125 mg as antiemetic prophylaxis on day 1 [13]. Patients on days 2–3 received oral dexamethasone 4 mg twice daily or oral aprepitant 80 mg daily. No signiﬁcant differences were observed on day 1. On days 2–5, the complete response rates, the primary end point, were identical in both arms (79.5%). Also no signiﬁcant differences were observed with respect to the secondary efﬁcacy end point, but signiﬁcantly more patients complained of heartburn and insomnia in the dexamethasone group on days 2–5. The use of steroids in the delayed phase tends to be reduced, because of the side-effects, and it should be noted that the netupitant–palonosetron and rolapitant studies did not use dexamethasone on days 2 and 3.
Therefore, in women with breast cancer treated with a com- bination of a 5-HT3 RA, dexamethasone and an NK1 RA to prevent acute nausea and vomiting, aprepitant or dexametha- sone should be used on days 2 and 3 but not if fosaprepitant, netupitant or rolapitant has been used on day 1 [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].
If an NK1 receptor antagonist is not available for the prophylaxis
of nausea and vomiting induced by AC chemotherapy, palono- setron is the preferred 5-HT3 RA [14].

 
are there differences among the NK1 RAs?
Aprepitant and netupitant are inhibitors of CYP3A4 and as a consequence, both signiﬁcantly increase the exposure to oral dexamethasone; hence, reduction in oral dexamethasone doses is recommended during co-administration (from 20 to 12 mg). Rolapitant is not an inhibitor or inducer of CYP3A4 and there- fore does not require a reduced dose of dexamethasone when co-administered. However, rolapitant is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6. At present, no comparative studies have been carried out to identify differences in efﬁcacy and toxicity between the three NK1 RAs. Therefore, when available, the choice may be dependent on the respective convenience and cost.

other highly emetogenic chemotherapy
These agents include mechlorethamine, streptozocin, cyclo- phosphamide ≥1500 mg/m2, carmustine and dacarbazine. Even
 
if no randomised studies have evaluated the NK1 RAs against emesis induced by these drugs, adding an NK1 RA to the com- bination of a 5-HT3 RA and dexamethasone for all non-cisplatin and non-AC highly emetogenic chemotherapy is recommended.

dose, schedule, route of administration and safety of antiemetics
Suggested doses, schedules and route of administration of the 5- HT3 RAs, the NK1 RAs and dexamethasone in the prevention of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting induced by highly eme- togenic chemotherapy are reported in Tables 2–4. With the 5- HT3 RAs, electrocardiography changes, particularly QTc pro- longation, are a class effect. The risk may differ between these agents and palonosetron seems to induce the lowest risk [15]. Due to cardiac adverse effects, FDA warnings against both the
i.v. dose of dolasetron (Drug Safety Communication, December
 

 


2010) and the high 32 mg i.v. dose of ondansetron (Drug Safety Communication, June 2012) have been released. These formula- tions have therefore been withdrawn [15]. A transdermal formu- lation of granisetron has been evaluated versus daily oral granisetron (2 mg/day for 3–5 days) in a randomised, double- blind study carried out in 582 patients submitted to multiple- day moderately or highly emetogenic chemotherapy [16]. The transdermal formulation of granisetron was non-inferior to 3–5 days of daily oral granisetron. A patch providing 3.1 mg granise- tron/24 h for up to 7 days has been marketed.
Finally, two large randomised, double-blind studies con- ﬁrmed non-inferiority of the oral 0.5 mg palonosetron dose compared with the i.v. 0.25 mg dose in patients receiving cis- platin-based chemotherapy [17] or different antineoplastic agents with a moderate emetogenic potential [18]. Concerning NK1 RAs, a study in 16 young, healthy volunteers showed that the 5-day NK1 receptor binding afﬁnity of a single dose of oral aprepitant 165 mg was as high as a single i.v. dose of fosaprepi- tant 150 mg [19]. It is unknown if the results can be extrapolated to cancer patients, who are older than the healthy volunteers in the study and typically require 4–6 different drugs each day, heightening the risk of drug–drug interactions with the oral for- mulation. Nevertheless, the single oral dose was approved by the EMA, but not the FDA. No clinical trial has investigated the 165 mg single oral dose.
The EMA has recommended a change in the use of metoclo- pramide due to the risk of neurological effects such as short- term extrapyramidal disorders [EMA/443003/2013]. The EMA recommends metoclopramide not to be used in children below 1 year of age and for adults to be used in a daily maximum dose of 30 mg (e.g. 10 mg × 3 orally) for a maximum of 5 days. The authors of this guideline believe that 10 mg of metoclopramide is not superior to placebo in the effect against chemotherapy- induced nausea and vomiting and that higher doses are toler- able, when given for 2–3 days.
 
olanzapine
Studies of low to moderate quality have investigated the antie- metic efﬁcacy and tolerability of olanzapine, an approved anti- psychotic drug that blocks multiple neurotransmitters in the central nervous system: dopamine D1, D2, D3 receptors, sero- tonin 5-HT2a, 5-HT2c, 5-HT3 and 5-HT6 receptors, α1 adrener- gic receptors, muscarinic receptors and histamine H1 receptors. A phase III open trial, carried out in patients submitted to cis-
platin ≥70 mg/m2 or cyclophosphamide ≥500 mg/m2 and doxo- rubicin ≥50 mg/m2, compared olanzapine with aprepitant in the
prevention of chemotherapy-induced emesis [20]. Patients were randomised to receive oral olanzapine 10 mg, palonosetron
0.25 mg i.v. and dexamethasone 20 mg i.v. on day 1 and oral olanzapine 10 mg on days 2–4 or oral aprepitant 125 mg, palo- nosetron 0.25 mg i.v. and dexamethasone 12 mg i.v. on day 1 and oral aprepitant 80 mg on days 2–3 and oral dexamethasone 4 mg bid on days 2–4. In 251 patients, the complete response was not signiﬁcantly different between the two antiemetic regi- mens on day 1 (97% versus 87%) on days 2–5 (77% versus 73%) and on days 1–5 (77% versus 73%), respectively. The rate of no nausea on days 1–5 was superior with olanzapine (69% versus 38%). Unfortunately, this study had a number of shortcomings: it was an open study and, therefore, not ideal to evaluate the impact on subjective end points such as nausea. Due to the small sample size, the study was only powered to investigate large differences such as a 15% difference in complete response on days 1–5. It was not deﬁned if the study was designed as a superiority, non-infer- iority or equivalence study. More recently, a phase II study [21] and a randomised, double-blind phase III study published as an abstract only (at the time of writing) [22] reported high complete response rates and high protection rates against nausea in patients receiving cisplatin-based or AC chemotherapy, when olanzapine was combined with a three-drug combination of a 5-HT3 RA, dexamethasone and the NK1 RA aprepitant.
In conclusion, olanzapine seems to be useful in the prophy- laxis of delayed nausea [superior to (fos)aprepitant] and equal to (fos)aprepitant in the prevention of acute symptoms. Olanzapine may be considered with a 5-HT3 RA plus dexa- methasone, particularly when nausea is an issue, but using the 10 mg dose, patient sedation may be a concern [MASCC level of conﬁdence: low; MASCC level of consensus: low; ESMO level of evidence II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].


prevention of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting induced by MEC
Previous MASCC/ESMO guidelines recommended palonosetron plus dexamethasone for the prophylaxis of acute nausea and vomiting. Furthermore, for MEC known to be associated with a signiﬁcant incidence of delayed nausea and vomiting, patients should receive antiemetic prophylaxis for delayed emesis; in this case, multiday oral dexamethasone was the preferred treatment [1].

the prophylaxis of MEC-induced acute nausea and vomiting
Studies evaluating palonosetron versus other 5-HT3 RAs have almost exclusively been carried out in patients receiving cisplatin
 
or breast cancer patients receiving AC. Therefore, there is a lack of comparative studies in MEC agents as deﬁned in this guideline.
A meta-analysis of randomised trials concluded that palono- setron in the above reported patient population was superior to other 5-HT3 RAs [23]. A limitation of the published data is that most of the palonosetron clinical trials did not permit the ad- ministration of corticosteroids. Thus, there is no deﬁnitive evi- dence demonstrating an advantage of the use of palonosetron with respect to the other 5-HT3 RAs, when both are combined with dexamethasone. Therefore, for the prevention of acute emesis in MEC-treated patients, a 5-HT3 RA plus dexametha- sone is recommended [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].

the prophylaxis of MEC-induced delayed nausea and vomiting
The recommendation for dexamethasone beyond 24 h for MEC was based upon a study by the Italian Group for Antiemetic Research [24]. This study concluded that in patients who did not vomit or had experienced moderate to severe nausea in the ﬁrst 24 h, there was a beneﬁt for oral dexamethasone 4 mg twice/day on days 2–5. Unfortunately, results according to the different MEC agents used have not been published. There are no data evaluating the role of dexamethasone or other antie- metics for preventing delayed emesis in MEC.
Two recent studies have been published evaluating the need for prophylaxis in the delayed phase with irinotecan. A placebo-con- trolled study in 68 patients showed a small, non-statistically sig- niﬁcant difference in favour of dexamethasone (82.9% versus 78.8%) [25]. An observational study in 44 colorectal cancer patients treated with irinotecan, folinic acid and 5-ﬂuorouracil and receiving dexamethasone 8 mg i.v. and a 5-HT3 RA on day 1 showed 86% complete response on day 1 and 82% complete re- sponse during the delayed emesis period [26]. The relatively good control in these studies suggests that prophylaxis for delayed emesis in irinotecan-based chemotherapy may not be warranted.
In conclusion, no new data have emerged that allow the iden- tiﬁcation of patients at sufﬁciently high risk of delayed emesis to warrant prophylaxis. Previous data have demonstrated that some but not all patients may have reduced nausea or vomiting with the addition of dexamethasone beyond 24 h. Some new data are available for carboplatin and will be reviewed below. For other MEC agents, it can be concluded that: in patients re- ceiving MEC with a known potential for delayed emesis (e.g. oxaliplatin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide), the use of dexa- methasone for days 2–3 can be considered [MASCC level of conﬁdence: low; MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence III; ESMO grade of recommendation: C]. No routine prophylaxis for delayed emesis can be recommended for all other patients receiving MEC [MASCC level of conﬁdence: no conﬁdence possible; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence IV; ESMO grade of recommendation: D].

which MEC should receive prophylaxis including an NK1 RA?
A randomised trial evaluating the role of an NK1 RA added to a 5-HT3 RA and dexamethasone versus a 5-HT3 RA plus
 
dexamethasone has been carried out in 848 MEC-treated patients. Approximately one half of the patients received AC which, at the time, was not considered highly emetogenic [27]. The primary efﬁcacy end point, no vomiting during the ﬁrst 5 days, was signiﬁcantly superior in patients receiving the NK1 RA. Among those receiving non-AC-based chemotherapy regi- mens, more patients in the aprepitant group reported no vomit- ing compared with those in the control group in all phases (overall: 83.2% versus 71.3%; acute: 96.5% versus 91.6%;
delayed: 84.5% versus 73.9%) [27]. No statement of statistical signiﬁcance was provided as this was a post hoc analysis. In any case, not all MEC-treated patients may have a sufﬁciently high risk of emesis to warrant prophylactic therapy including an NK1 RA from cycle 1.
A double-blind, placebo-controlled, study evaluating fosaprepi- tant (150 mg i.v.) plus oral ondansetron (8 mg before chemother- apy and 8 mg after 8 h) plus oral dexamethasone (12 mg) versus oral ondansetron, at the same doses in the ﬁrst 24 h plus 8 mg every 12 h on days 2 and 3, plus oral dexamethasone (20 mg) in 1015 patients receiving non-AC MEC has recently been published [28]. Fosaprepitant signiﬁcantly increased the complete response on days 2–5, the primary end point (78.9% versus 68.5%), as well as the complete response on days 1–5 (77.1% versus 66.9%) but not the complete response on day 1 (93.2% versus 91%). On days 1–5, the percentage of patients with no vomiting and no signiﬁ- cant nausea was signiﬁcantly superior with fosaprepitant. No sub- group analyses have been reported.

carboplatin
Six studies, two published only as abstracts, evaluated the role of adding an NK1 RA to a 5-HT3 RA plus dexamethasone in car- boplatin-treated patients. One recently published study [29] and the two abstracts all presented a subgroup analysis or post hoc analysis of studies involving both AC- and non-AC-treated patients. From these studies, it seems that in carboplatin-treated patients, adding an NK1 RA increased the complete response by
∼10%–15%.
In a phase II study (n = 91), the combination of granisetron
(1 mg i.v.) plus dexamethasone (20 mg i.v. on day 1 and 8 mg i.v. on days 2 and 3) was compared with aprepitant (125 mg orally on day 1 and 80 mg on days 2 and 3) plus granisetron (same dose) and dexamethasone (12 mg i.v. on day 1 and 4 mg i.v. on days 2 and 3) [30]. Almost all of the patients (89/91) received carbopla- tin-based chemotherapy and most of them had a gynaecological cancer. The complete response was superior but not statistically signiﬁcant with aprepitant (62% versus 52% on days 1–5, 98% versus 96% on day 1 and 62% versus 52% on days 2–5).
A phase III, double-blind study in 297 chemotherapy-naïve patients with ovarian, endometrial or cervical cancer, scheduled to receive carboplatin plus paclitaxel, randomised patients to aprepi- tant or placebo, both combined with a 5-HT3 RA plus dexametha- sone [31]. Adding aprepitant signiﬁcantly increased the complete response (61.6% versus 47.3%), no vomiting (78.2% versus 54.8%) and no signiﬁcant nausea (85.4% versus 74.7%).
Finally, a phase II open-label study evaluated aprepitant com- bined with a 5-HT3 RA plus dexamethasone (8 mg on days 1–3) versus a 5-HT3 RA plus dexamethasone alone in 134 patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer who received
 
carboplatin-based ﬁrst-line chemotherapy [32]. The primary end point was the complete response rate on days 1–5; it was nu- merically superior in patients receiving aprepitant (80.3% versus 67.2%), but this difference was not statistically signiﬁcant.
In conclusion, to prevent carboplatin-induced acute nausea and vomiting, a combination of an NK1 RA, dexamethasone and a 5-HT3 RA is recommended [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B]. If patients receive fosaprepitant, netupitant or rolapitant on day 1, no antiemetic prophylaxis for delayed emesis is required. If patients receive aprepitant on day 1, aprepitant on days 2 and 3 is recom- mended [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].

oxaliplatin
The ﬁrst double-blind trial to evaluate the role of an NK1 RA for oxaliplatin was carried out in 710 colorectal cancer patients re- ceiving casopitant or placebo [33]. Casopitant 90 mg i.v. on day 1 or placebo were administered in combination with ondanse- tron 8 mg bid oral on days 1–3 and dexamethasone 8 mg i.v. on day 1. The incidence of vomiting on days 1–5 was low in both arms (11% and 10% in the placebo and casopitant arms, respect- ively) with the vast majority of emesis occurring in the delayed phase. Both groups received ondansetron on days 2–3 which may have increased the control of delayed emesis.
A different conclusion about the value of an NK1 RA was reported in a more recent antiemetic study for oxaliplatin- induced emesis [34]. An open-label randomised trial in 413 patients compared a 5-HT3 RA (day 1 only) and dexamethasone (administered on days 1–4) + aprepitant versus a 5-HT3 RA and dexamethasone. The primary end point was no vomiting. Signiﬁcantly more patients in the aprepitant group achieved no vomiting overall and in the delayed phase than those in the control group (95.7% versus 83.6%, and 95.7% versus 84.7%, re- spectively).
These two large randomised trials came to apparently con- ﬂicting conclusions about the role of NK1 RA for oxaliplatin- based chemotherapy. In view of the discordant results, no rec- ommendation can be made about combining an NK1 RA to dexamethasone and a 5-HT3 RA for the prophylaxis of oxalipla- tin-induced emesis.

prevention of nausea and vomiting induced by multiple-day cisplatin chemotherapy
Multiday chemotherapy studies have included drugs such as dactinomycin, dacarbazine, ifosfamide and cisplatin. Only a few small studies have been carried out with this type of chemother- apy schedule. In patients with germ cell tumours, the i.v. com- bination of a 5-HT3 RA plus dexamethasone has been shown to
induce ∼55%–83% complete protection from vomiting during
the 3–5 days of cisplatin administration and this combination
has proven to be superior to i.v. high-dose metoclopramide plus dexamethasone, alizapride plus dexamethasone and to a 5-HT3 RA alone [1].
 
Using a combination of a 5-HT3 RA plus dexamethasone, patients receiving consecutive 5 days of cisplatin for testicular cancer will have little or no nausea or vomiting during the ﬁrst 3 days of chemotherapy. The worst nausea is seen on days 4 and 5 as well as on days 6, 7 and 8. Whether this all reﬂects delayed nausea from days 1 and 2 is unknown.
A double-blind randomised crossover study enrolling 69 eva- luable germ cell tumour patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy for 5 consecutive days has been published [35]. All patients received a 5-HT3 RA for 5 days and dexamethasone 20 mg on the ﬁrst 2 days of chemotherapy. Then the patients were randomised to aprepitant 125 mg on day 3 and 80 mg on days 4–7 plus dexamethasone 4 mg twice/day on days 6–8 or placebo on days 3–7 plus dexamethasone 8 mg twice/day on days 6–7 and 4 mg twice/day on day 8. The complete response was signiﬁcantly superior with aprepitant compared with placebo (42% versus 13% of patients). At least one emetic episode was observed signiﬁcantly more often with placebo (47% versus 16%, P < 0.001). The visual analogue scale (VAS) score for nausea was better, but not signiﬁcantly superior with aprepitant. Aprepitant was also preferred by the patients (38 versus 11 patients). Toxicity was not increased by aprepitant. Conﬁrmatory supportive evidence with aprepitant was seen in phase II trials conducted in Australia and Japan [36, 37]. The optimal dose and schedule of aprepitant, 5-HT3 RA as well as of dexamethasone remains to be identiﬁed.
Therefore, patients affected by metastatic germ cell tumours receiving multiple-day cisplatin should receive a 5-HT3 RA plus dexamethasone plus aprepitant for the prevention of acute nausea and vomiting and dexamethasone for delayed nausea and vomiting [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate, MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence: II, ESMO grade of recommendation: B].

prevention of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy with low and minimal emetogenic potential
Many of the newer targeted therapies ﬁt into the category of agents of low and minimal emetogenic potential. For patients treated with low or minimally emetogenic chemotherapy, there is little evidence from clinical trials supporting the choice of a given antiemetic therapy or of any treatment at all. Furthermore, the degree of nausea and/or vomiting related to these agents has not been well documented, nor are there prospective trials that clearly outline the incidence and severity of nausea and vomit- ing for each drug.
Since the previous MASCC/ESMO guideline, only a prospect- ive cohort study evaluating the efﬁcacy of granisetron to prevent acute nausea and vomiting with chemotherapy of low emeto- genic potential has been reported [38]. In this study, patients received dexamethasone or metoclopramide or granisetron before low emetogenic chemotherapy. The patients receiving granisetron achieved a higher complete response rate in the acute phase, but no difference was shown for acute nausea or delayed nausea and vomiting. No guidelines have recommended routine antiemetic prophylaxis against delayed emesis for low
 
emetogenic chemotherapy. Despite this, a study reports that after antiemetic prophylaxis, only 6% of low emetogenic chemo- therapy patients presented acute emesis but 22.8% had delayed emesis [39]. Another study showed that patients receiving low emetogenic chemotherapy had increasing delayed emesis from cycle 1 to cycle 4 (from 25% to 50%) [40].
In conclusion, a single antiemetic agent, such as dexametha- sone, a 5-HT3 RA or a dopamine RA, such as metoclopramide may be considered for prophylaxis in patients receiving chemo- therapy of low emetic risk [MASCC level of conﬁdence: no con- ﬁdence possible; MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence: II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].
No antiemetic should be routinely administered before chemotherapy to patients without a history of nausea and vomiting receiving minimally emetogenic chemotherapy [MASCC level of conﬁdence: no conﬁdence possible; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: IV; ESMO grade of recommendation: D].
No antiemetic should be administered for prevention of delayed nausea and vomiting induced by low or minimally eme- togenic chemotherapy [MASCC level of conﬁdence: no conﬁ- dence possible; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: IV; ESMO grade of recommendation: D]. If a patient experiences acute or delayed nausea or vomiting after low or minimally emetogenic chemotherapy, it is advised that, with subsequent chemotherapy treatments, the regimen for the next higher emetic level be given.

breakthrough chemotherapy-induced emesis and refractory emesis
Antiemetics are most effective when used prophylactically. Therefore, it is preferable to use maximally effective antiemetics as ﬁrst-line therapy rather than withholding more effective antiemetics for later use at the time of antiemetic failure. Breakthrough chemotherapy-induced emesis, deﬁned as emesis and/or nausea occurring on the day of chemotherapy despite guideline-recommended prophylaxis, remains an unsolved problem. In a study, 108 out of 276 patients treated with highly emetogenic chemotherapy experienced breakthrough nausea and vomiting, despite prophylaxis with palonosetron 0.25 mg i.
v.	plus fosaprepitant 150 mg i.v. and dexamethasone 12 mg i.v. on day 1 and 8 mg orally on days 2–4 [41]. The 108 patients with breakthrough nausea and vomiting were randomised to either olanzapine 10 mg orally for 3 days versus a low dose of metoclopramide, 10 mg orally three times daily for 3 days. No further emesis during the 72 h observation period was shown by 70% of patients receiving olanzapine versus 31% of those treated with metoclopramide. Furthermore, 68% had no nausea with olanzapine compared with 23% with metoclopramide. Olanzapine induced mild to moderate sedation. A supportive phase II study was recently published [42]. For the treatment of breakthrough nausea and vomiting, it is recommended to use an antiemetic with a different mechanism of action than that of the antiemetic(s) used for prophylaxis. The available evidence for breakthrough nausea and vomiting suggests the use of olan- zapine 10 mg orally daily for 3 days. The mild to moderate sed- ation in this patient population, especially elderly patients, is a potential problem with olanzapine [MASCC level of conﬁdence:
 
moderate; MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence: II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].
A few trials have investigated patients with refractory emesis deﬁned as emesis in the previous cycle of chemotherapy, but without emesis before the subsequent cycle of chemotherapy. A number of approaches have been utilised including switching to a different 5-HT3 RA or adding other agents such as dopamine RA or benzodiazepines [1]. In two randomised trials, metopi- mazine improved the efﬁcacy of ondansetron and of ondanse- tron plus methylprednisolone. Some studies have documented antiemetic activity of NK1 receptor antagonists in patients who did not achieve complete protection from emesis when treated with dexamethasone and a serotonin receptor antagonist alone [1]. Again, it seems a reasonable approach to add an antiemetic with a different mechanism of action than that of those used in the previous cycle of chemotherapy.

prevention of anticipatory nausea and vomiting
Anticipatory nausea is believed to be a learned response to chemotherapy. In a randomised, double-blind study evaluating patients in the last 3 days before chemotherapy, anticipatory vomiting occurred in 3% and anticipatory nausea in 9% at any time during the entire course of adjuvant CMF/CEF chemother- apy for breast cancer [43]. In a recent Asian-Paciﬁc study of 598 adult cancer patients, anticipatory vomiting was infrequent (1.5%–2.3%), while anticipatory nausea continues to be more commonly reported than anticipatory vomiting (up to 13.8%) and the risk increases with each successive chemotherapy treat- ment cycle received [44]. Similarly, in a European survey, antici- patory nausea was reported in 8.3%, 10.1% and 13.8% of 991 adult cancer patients over three consecutive chemotherapy blocks [45]. A history of poor chemotherapy-induced nausea or vomiting control can increase the risk of anticipatory nausea and vomiting by 3.7 times by the second chemotherapy block and by 3.3 times by the third chemotherapy block [44]. Past ex- perience with nausea and vomiting due to various causes (e.g. anticipatory nausea and vomiting in previous chemotherapy blocks, pregnancy, motion sickness) has been identiﬁed as a risk factor for anticipatory nausea and vomiting [46]. In addition, anxiety may play a role in predisposing patients to anticipatory nausea and vomiting [44, 45], but this has not been consistently described in all studies or in all chemotherapy cycles [47].
Once it develops, anticipatory nausea and vomiting is difﬁ-
cult to control by pharmacological treatment. Therefore, the panel recommended that the best approach for the prevention of anticipatory nausea and vomiting is the best  possible control of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: III, ESMO grade of recommen- dation: A].
Three studies evaluating three separate pharmacological inter- ventions with benzodiazepines (alprazolam, diazepam and lor- azepam) have been summarised in a systematic review [47]. Benzodiazepines are recommended to reduce the occurrence of anticipatory nausea and vomiting [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate, MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence: II, ESMO grade of recommendation: A].
 

 

 
Behavioural interventions may also play an important role in the management of anticipatory symptoms [48]. Behavioural therapies, in particular progressive muscle relaxation training, systematic desensitisation and hypnosis, may be used to treat anticipatory nausea and vomiting [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate, MASCC level of consensus: moderate; ESMO level of evidence: II, ESMO grade of recommendation: B].

prevention of nausea and vomiting induced by high-dose chemotherapy
Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in patients treated with high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell support has several contributing causes, including the use of prophylactic antibio- tics and opioids prescribed for concurrent mucositis manage- ment. An additional confounding factor is the use of total-body irradiation. Until recently, only phase II studies of a 5-HT3 RA alone or combined with dexamethasone were published and the interpretation of these studies was problematic due to the various chemotherapy regimens used, small sample sizes, dur- ation of high-dose chemotherapy, different patient populations and tumour types included. The natural history of chemother- apy-induced nausea and vomiting in patients undergoing high- dose chemotherapy and stem cell transplantation is largely unknown. Most patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell support have experienced nausea and vomiting with prior chemotherapy or irradiation. Following the positive results of phase II trials in patients receiving high-dose BEAM (carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, melphalan) [49] or high- dose melphalan [50] before hematopoietic stem cell transplant- ation, two phase III trials have recently been published [51, 52]. The ﬁrst study evaluated 179 patients treated with a high-dose cyclophosphamide preparative regimen before stem cell trans- plant. Patients were randomised to receive ondansetron and dexamethasone with or without aprepitant administered daily
 
and for 3 days after the completion of the preparative regimen. The study showed a signiﬁcant reduction in emesis without in- creasing toxicity or use of rescue medication. In fact, the complete response rate (no vomiting and no or mild nausea) was 82% with the aprepitant arm versus 66% with placebo. However, there was no difference in the mean nausea VAS score and in the amount of rescue antiemetics used [51]. The other phase III study evaluated patients with multiple myeloma randomised to receive either aprepitant administered at a dose of 125 mg orally on day 1 and 80 mg orally on days 2–4; granisetron (given at a dose of 2 mg orally on days 1–4), and dexamethasone (given at a dose of 4 mg orally on day 1 and 2 mg orally on days 2–3) or placebo [52]. The placebo arm utilised dexamethasone at a dose of 8 mg orally on day 1 and 4 mg orally on days 2–3. The high-dose chemotherapy consisted of melphalan at a dose of 100 mg/m2 administered intravenously on days 1–2. The autologous stem cell transplant was carried out on day 4. A total of 362 patients entered the study. The complete response on days 1–5 after melphalan administra- tion was signiﬁcantly higher in the aprepitant arm compared with the control group (58% versus 41%). The absence of major nausea (94% versus 88%) and emesis (78% versus 65%) on days 1–5 was signiﬁcantly improved by aprepitant. In conclusion, for patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy for stem cell trans- plant, a combination of a 5-HT3 RA with dexamethasone and aprepitant (125 mg orally on day 1 and 80 mg on days 2–4) is recommended before chemotherapy [MASCC level of conﬁdence: high; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: I; ESMO grade of recommendation: A].

prevention of radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
Several observational studies have demonstrated that radiother- apy-induced nausea and vomiting (RINV) is under-treated, with few patients receiving antiemetic prophylaxis [53–55].
 
The emetic risk of radiotherapy is divided into four risk levels: high, moderate, low and minimal (Table 5). The risk levels depend on the site of radiation, and do not take into account radiation dose, fractionation or technique or other pro- posed risk factors such as ﬁeld size. The risk classiﬁcation is mainly based on incidence of emesis in clinical studies and expert opinions. Two observational studies by the Italian Group for Antiemetic Research in Radiotherapy identiﬁed that irradiated site (upper abdomen), ﬁeld size >400 cm2 and concomitant chemotherapy are independent risk factors for development of RINV [54, 55]. The only identiﬁed patient-related risk factor for RINV is the previous treatment with chemotherapy.

risk classiﬁcation
In the current guidelines, the following changes on the risk clas- siﬁcation took place, mainly based on expert opinions:
(i)	total nodal irradiation was previously classiﬁed as high emetic risk, but as this radiotherapy ﬁeld technique is no longer in use, it was decided to exclude this.
(ii)	In the moderate emetic risk level, half body irradiation (HBI) and upper body irradiation (UBI) were also excluded. Both HBI and UBI include the upper abdomen, and as it is the irradiation of the upper abdomen that gives the moderate risk of RINV, it would be sufﬁcient just to mention the upper abdomen.
(iii)	Craniospinal irradiation was previously in the low emetic risk level. No randomised antiemetic studies in craniosp- inal radiotherapy are available, but the risk of RINV in cra- niospinal radiotherapy is unlikely to be less than for large ﬁeld vertebral irradiation for which data from randomised trials have demonstrated that prophylaxis with a 5-HT3 RA is superior compared with prophylaxis with a dopamine RA or placebo. Therefore, it was decided to reclassify cra- niospinal radiation to the moderate risk category.
(iv)	The lower thorax region is in the low emetic risk level. In a study [54], the risk of nausea and/or vomiting was 31% in 126 patients receiving thorax radiotherapy and no distinc- tion between the upper and lower region was made. Thus, it was decided to remove the word ‘lower’.

antiemetic treatment options
Since the previous guidelines, no randomised, controlled antiemetic studies in RINV have been published. In 2012, a systematic review and meta-analysis evaluated prophylaxis with 5-HT3 RA in single or multiple fraction radiotherapy [56]. Nine studies were included in the analysis, and different sites of irradiation were included. The authors concluded that 5-HT3 RAs are superior to placebo or dopa- mine RAs in the prevention of emesis during radiotherapy. The evi- dence is less concrete for the control of nausea. The dose and duration of prophylaxis with a 5-HT3 RA remain unclear, as well as comparisons between different 5-HT3 RAs. Thus, this analysis does not change existing guidelines recommendations.
A systematic review, focusing on timing and duration of the prophylaxis of RINV with a 5-HT3 RA, evaluated 25 prophy- laxis studies in high, moderate and low emetic risk radiotherapy [57]. Due to the heterogeneity of the studies (e.g. reported end points, emetic risks, fractionation), no correlation between
 
duration of the prophylaxis and response rates could be made. The updated recommendations are summarised in Table 5.
Previously, the recommendation for the low emetic risk level (cranium, head and neck, thorax region and pelvis) included prophylaxis or rescue with a 5-HT3 RA. Due to the very heteroge- neous sites of irradiation in the low-risk group, the limited number of studies including these sites and mainly addressing efﬁ- cacy of 5-HT3 RAs, it was decided that the guideline should not be restricted to recommend a 5-HT3 RA, but the choice could also be dexamethasone or a dopamine RA. In clinical practice, the antie- metic treatment of choice in cranial irradiation would be a cortico- steroid (due to the oedema), and therefore, this was included in the guideline. For minimal risk, and again based on expert opinion, it was decided not to restrict the recommendation to a dopamine RA or a 5-HT3 RA, but also to include dexamethasone.

concurrent chemoradiotherapy
In patients receiving chemoradiotherapy (CRT), it is advised to prescribe antiemetics according to the emetic risk of the chemo- therapy unless it is considered that the risk of nausea and vomiting induced by the radiotherapy is higher. Recently, the ﬁrst rando- mised, double-blind study in women with cervical cancer com- pared palonosetron, dexamethasone and placebo with palonosetron, dexamethasone and fosaprepitant during 5 weeks of fractionated radiotherapy and weekly cisplatin in a dose of 40 mg/ m2 [58]. There was a signiﬁcantly lower cumulative risk of emesis in the fosaprepitant group compared with the placebo group [sub- hazard ratio 0.58 (95% conﬁdence interval 0.39–0.87); P = 0.008]. Further studies in concurrent CRT are warranted.

prevention of acute chemotherapy- induced nausea and vomiting in children
The previous MASCC/ESMO guidelines recommended that paediatric patients receiving chemotherapy of high or moderate emetogenic potential should receive antiemetic prophylaxis with a combination of a 5-HT3 RA and dexamethasone [1].
Although antiemetic studies in children are few, the results of some new paediatric trials are now available. Paediatric studies continue to present many limitations such as the classiﬁcation of emetogenicity based on experience in adults rather than chil- dren, evaluation of only acute chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and deﬁnitions of acute complete control which vary among studies. Furthermore, among studies that assessed nausea, no study used a validated paediatric nausea assessment instrument to evaluate nausea severity.
Recently, two studies evaluated the beneﬁt of adding aprepi- tant to ondansetron for the prophylaxis of chemotherapy- induced vomiting. In a randomised double-blind, placebo-con- trolled study in 96 children receiving highly emetogenic chemo- therapy, chemotherapy-induced vomiting was evaluated from administration of the ﬁrst chemotherapy dose to 24 h after the last dose of chemotherapy in children receiving multiple-day chemotherapy. A signiﬁcantly higher complete response rate (no vomiting and no retching) was achieved with ondansetron plus dexamethasone plus aprepitant when compared with ondansetron plus dexamethasone (48% versus 12%) [59]. The second trial compared ondansetron plus aprepitant with/
 
without dexamethasone versus ondansetron plus placebo with/ without dexamethasone [60]. A complete response rate (no vomiting, no retching and no use of rescue medications) of 65% was reported in the ondansetron plus aprepitant arm versus 51% in the ondansetron arm for the ﬁrst 24 h after administra- tion of the ﬁrst chemotherapy dose. However, the number of children who received dexamethasone in each group is unknown and the dose of dexamethasone, when given, was un- controlled and varied widely. As a result, it is difﬁcult to ascer- tain the contribution of aprepitant itself to chemotherapy- induced vomiting control in this trial. Interestingly, the study reported a reduced rate of vomiting control in children who received dexamethasone.
Therefore, in children receiving chemotherapy of high emetic risk, an antiemetic prophylaxis with a 5-HT3 RA (granisetron, ondansetron, tropisetron or palonosetron) plus dexamethasone plus aprepitant is recommended [MASCC level of conﬁdence: high; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].
The use of dexamethasone is prohibited in many paediatric on- cology protocols (e.g. leukaemia and brain tumours) due to con- cerns regarding potential interference with apoptosis, fungal infection and distribution of chemotherapy across the blood–brain barrier. Therefore, children who cannot receive dexamethasone should receive a 5HT3 RA plus aprepitant [MASCC level of conﬁ- dence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].
Aprepitant may not be an option for all children receiving highly emetogenic chemotherapy. An oral liquid aprepitant for- mulation is not always available. Intravenously administered fosaprepitant cannot be routinely recommended currently since paediatric experience is scant. When aprepitant administration is not feasible or desirable, the guideline recommends a 5-HT3 RA plus dexamethasone be given to children receiving highly emetogenic chemotherapy [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moder- ate; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].
Children receiving MEC should receive antiemetic prophy- laxis with a 5-HT3 RA plus dexamethasone [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B]. Furthermore, children who cannot receive dexamethasone should receive a 5-HT3 RA and aprepitant [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B].
In children receiving chemotherapy of low emetogenicity. antie- metic prophylaxis with a 5-HT3 RA is recommended [MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: moder- ate; ESMO level of evidence: II; ESMO grade of recommendation: B]. In children receiving chemotherapy of minimal emetogenicity, no antiemetic prophylaxis is recommended [MASCC level of con- ﬁdence: moderate; MASCC level of consensus: high; ESMO level of evidence: V; ESMO grade of recommendation: D].

antiemetics in advanced cancer
The causes of nausea and vomiting in advanced cancer can be multifactorial (elevated intracranial pressure due to brain tumours, cerebral metastases or meningeal carcinomatosis,
 
biochemical syndromes such as hypercalcaemia, hyponatraemia, vestibular dysfunction, gastric stasis-related, such as with ascites, hepatomegaly, paraneoplastic neuropathy, opioid- induced, malignant bowel obstruction, etc.). Hence, a careful as- sessment which includes a detailed history, physical examin- ation and investigations for reversible causes is paramount. Of those with a reversible cause, about half are drug-related, mostly induced by opioids. There are two therapeutic approaches [61]. One is empirical; starting with one drug and if unsuccessful adding or rotating to another. The second is aetiological; that is management tailored to the suspected cause and/or likely recep- tors involved in generating nausea and/or vomiting. Concerning antiemetic treatment, when malignant bowel obstruction is excluded, the evidence base in this ﬁeld is minimal with largely poor quality trials or uncontrolled trials and case studies. The level of evidence in most studies is very low. While not docu- mented, experience suggests that clinicians favour metoclopra- mide as ﬁrst-line therapy due to small randomised trials [62, 63]. Haloperidol is often used as a second-line therapy, followed by levomepromazine and olanzapine which has some evidence of beneﬁt in prospective studies. Unlike chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, there is no evidence that combining antie- metics improves responses over monotherapy, although this needs formal research conﬁrmation.
In conclusion, the antiemetic treatment of choice in advanced cancer is metoclopramide [MASCC level of consensus: high, MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate; ESMO level of evidence: III, ESMO grade of recommendation: C]. Alternative options include haloperidol, levomepromazine or olanzapine [MASCC level of consensus: high, MASCC level of conﬁdence: low; ESMO level of evidence: V, ESMO grade of recommendation: D].

nausea and vomiting in malignant bowel obstruction
Patients with nausea and vomiting due to malignant bowel ob- struction unﬁt for surgery can be managed medically through two pharmacological approaches:
(i)	Anti-secretory drugs like anticholinergics (hyoscine hydro- bromide, hyoscine butylbromide HB, glycopyrrolate) and/ or somatostatin analogues octreotide ± glucocorticoids.
(ii)	Antiemetics alone or combined with anti-secretory drugs.
Few studies have assessed efﬁcacy, while there are no com- parative studies on different approaches. From 2009 to 2015, four randomised trials (three double-blind) were published evaluating octreotide [64–67] and all showed a reduction in nausea and/or vomiting episodes.
In conclusion, the drug recommended in bowel obstruction is octreotide, dosed around the clock, and given alongside a con- ventional antiemetic (with the committee recommending halo- peridol) [MASCC level of consensus: high, MASCC level of conﬁdence: high; ESMO level of evidence: II, ESMO grade of rec- ommendation: A]. If octreotide plus an antiemetic is suboptimal, the use of anticholinergic anti-secretory agents (e.g. scopolamine butylbromide, glycopyrronium bromide) and/or corticosteroids is recommended as either an adjunct or as an alternative intervention [MASCC level of consensus: high (moderate for corticosteroids), MASCC level of conﬁdence: moderate (low for corticosteroids);
 
ESMO level of evidence: IV, ESMO grade of recommendation: D]. Metoclopramide should be used with caution in partial bowel ob- struction and should not be used in complete bowel obstruction [MASCC level of consensus: low, MASCC level of conﬁdence: low; ESMO level of evidence: V, ESMO grade of recommendation: D].

opioid-induced nausea and vomiting
Nausea and vomiting are common side-effects of opioid analge- sics with up to 19% incidence of moderate/severe nausea and 40% vomiting. Opioid-induced nausea and vomiting may be an initiation side-effect, with tolerance after 5–7 days of therapy, but others consider it chronic. There are no randomised, con- trolled trials of prophylactic antiemetics for those starting opioids and several antiemetics appear active in managing opioid-induced nausea and vomiting [68]. In conclusion, no recommendation can be made about speciﬁc antiemetics in opioid-induced nausea and vomiting, although various antie- metics may help. Opioid rotation and route switching may be ef- fective approaches. There are no data to support antiemetic prophylaxis in this situation [MASCC level of consensus: high, MASCC level of conﬁdence: low; ESMO level of evidence: V; ESMO grade of recommendation: D].

summary
The 2016 MASCC/ESMO guidelines on antiemetics updated the classiﬁcation of the emetogenic potential of antineoplastic agents adding 42 new drugs many of which are orally administered. The MASCC antiemetic guideline recommendations at present can only be applied to intravenously administered antineoplastic agents, given the virtual absence of antiemetic trials with orally administered antineoplastics and the considerable uncertainty in deﬁning the emetogenic risk of oral agents. The recommendations for the prophylaxis of nausea and vomiting induced by different chemotherapeutic agents were updated. Two new NK1 RAs have achieved FDA (netupitant and rolapitant) and EMA (netupitant) approval and their role in the prophylaxis of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting induced by cisplatin, AC or carboplatin is discussed. In future research, it would be interesting to plan rando- mised double-blind comparative studies among the three NK1 RAs to identify if the two new drugs have an advantage over the more established aprepitant or if they produce the same outcomes. Also the new NK1 RAs should be investigated prospectively in set- tings other than cisplatin and AC chemotherapy.
Two studies suggested that aprepitant and metoclopramide were equally effective in the prophylaxis of cisplatin-induced delayed nausea and vomiting and that dexamethasone was as effective as aprepitant in women with breast cancer receiving an AC combin- ation, given the fact that aprepitant was applied on day 1.
Adding an NK1 RA to the previous standard regimen consisting of a 5-HT3 RA plus dexamethasone has been addressed in mul- tiple-day cisplatin-based chemotherapy and high-dose chemother- apy. Finally, a new classiﬁcation of the emetogenic potential of radiotherapy according to irradiated sites and an update of the recommended antiemetic treatments has been reported as well as the use of fosaprepitant in combined CRT (Table 5).
Control of vomiting has markedly improved during the past few years. Therefore, in the future, attention should shift to the
 
control of nausea, at present the greatest remaining emetogenic challenge. In fact, although nausea and vomiting seem to appear and respond in parallel, they are not the same phenomena. While vomiting can be objectively measured in terms of number of emetic episodes, nausea is a subjective phenomenon that requires different measurement tools and deﬁnitions. It has also been recognised that the standard primary end point for antie- metic trials, complete response, is deﬁned as ‘no vomiting and no use of rescue medication’ and this does not refer to nausea or protection from nausea at all. Preliminary clinical trials of several agents such as olanzapine, amisulpride and ginger have also suggested that some agents may be more effective against acute and delayed nausea than against acute and delayed vomit- ing. Identiﬁcation and characterisation of antinausea agents and rational inclusion of these agents into antiemetic regimens may be the primary challenge in coming years.

acknowledgements
We thank the following members of one or more of the 10 antie- metic committees and for their participation in the MASCC/ ESMO Consensus Conference: E. Ballatori, Medical Statistician, Spinetoli, Italy; M.J. Brames, Division of Hematology–Oncology Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University, Indianapolis, USA;
L. Celio, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori; Milan, Italy; A. Chan, Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, Singapore; A. Davies, Supportive and Palliative Care Department, Royal Surrey County Hospital/St Luke’s Cancer Centre, UK; M. Davis, Section of Palliative Medicine and Supportive Oncology, Department of Hematology–Oncology, Taussig Cancer Institute, The Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, USA;
K. Dennis, Division of Radiotherapy Oncology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada;
F. Jahn, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittemberg, Halle, Germany; E. Maranzano, Department of Oncology, Radiation Oncology Centre, Azienda Ospedaliera Santa Maria, Terni, Italy; R. Navari, Indiana University School of Medicine, South Bend, Indiana, USA; A. Orsey, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Connecticut Children’s Medical Center, Hartford, Connecticut, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut, USA; C.I. Ripamonti, Supportive Care in Cancer Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy; C. Rittenberg, Rittenberg Oncology Consulting, Metairie, LA, USA; M. Saito, Juntendo University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan;
L. Schwartzberg, West Cancer Center/University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, USA; L. Sung, Department of Pediatrics and Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children; Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; W. Tissing, Department of Pediatric Oncology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Finally, we thank Regine Deniel Ihlen and Theresa Zanatta, patient advocates during the Consensus Conference.

funding
We thank MASCC and ESMO for funding the Consensus Conference. No other funding was received.
 
conﬂict of interest
AM: MSD Merck; Helsinn; Tesaro; Norgine; Acacia Pharma. JH: Tesaro; Swedish Orphan Biovitrum. MA: Helsinn; Tesaro; MSD Merck; Roche. RJG: Helsinn; MSD Merck; Tesaro; Eisai. LLD: Sea-Band Ltd. LHE: Celgene; Ziopharm; Amgen. PF: MSD Merck; Riemser. KJ: Helsinn; MSD Merck; Tesaro. IO: Tesaro. BLR: Helsinn; MSD Merck; Tesaro. CHR: Swedish Orphan Biovitrum. DW: Nualtra Ltd. D. Warr: Helsinn, MSD Merck; Tesaro. FR, EB, RAC-S, PJH, JR and MvdW: none declared.


references
1.	Roila F, Herrstedt J, Aapro M et al. Guideline update for MASCC and ESMO in the prevention of chemotherapy- and radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: results of the Perugia consensus conference. Ann Oncol 2010; 21(Suppl. 5): v232–v243.
2.	Grunberg SM, Osoba D, Hesketh PJ et al. Evaluation of new antiemetic agents and deﬁnition of antineoplastic agent emetogenicity—an update. Support Care Cancer 2005; 13: 80–84.
3.	Jordan K, Jahn F, Aapro M. Recent developments in the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV): a comprehensive review. Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 1081–1090.
4.	Grunberg S, Chua D, Maru A et al. Single-dose fosaprepitant for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting associated with cisplatin therapy: randomized, double-blind study protocol—EASE. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 1495–1501.
5.	Saito H, Yoshizawa H, Yoshimori K et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of single-dose fosaprepitant in the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in patients receiving high-dose cisplatin: a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Ann Oncol 2013; 24: 1067–1073.
6.	Hu Z, Cheng Y, Zhang H et al. Aprepitant triple therapy for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting following high-dose cisplatin in Chinese patients: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III trial. Support Care Cancer 2014; 22: 979–987.
7.	Hesketh PJ, Rossi G, Rizzi G et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of NEPA, an oral combination of netupitant and palonosetron, for prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting following highly emetogenic chemotherapy: a randomized dose- ranging pivotal study. Ann Oncol 2014; 25: 1340–1346.
8.	Rapoport B, Chua D, Poma A et al. Study of rolapitant, a novel, long-acting, NK1 receptor antagonist, for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) due to highly emetogenic chemotherapy (HEC). Support Care Cancer 2015; 23: 3281–3288.
9.	Rapoport BL, Chasen MR, Gridelli C et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of rolapitant for prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting after administration of cisplatin-based highly emetogenic chemotherapy in patients with cancer: two randomised, active-controlled, double-blind, phase 3 trials. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 1079–1089.
10.	Roila F, Ruggeri B, Ballatori E et al. Aprepitant versus metoclopramide, both combined with dexamethasone, for the prevention of cisplatin-induced delayed emesis: a randomized, double-blind study. Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 1248–1253.
11.	Aapro M, Rugo H, Rossi G et al. A randomized phase III study evaluating the efﬁcacy and safety of NEPA, a ﬁxed-dose combination of netupitant and palonosetron, for prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting following moderately emetogenic chemotherapy. Ann Oncol 2014; 25: 1328–1333.
12.	Schwartzberg LS, Modiano MR, Rapoport BL et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of rolapitant for prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting after administration of moderately emetogenic chemotherapy or anthracycline and cyclophosphamide regimens in patients with cancer: a randomised, active-controlled, double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 1071–1078.
13.	Roila F, Ruggeri B, Ballatori E et al. Aprepitant versus dexamethasone for preventing chemotherapy-induced delayed emesis in patients with breast cancer: a randomized double-blind study. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 101–106.
 

14.	Saito M, Aogi K, Sekine I et al. Palonosetron plus dexamethasone versus granisetron plus dexamethasone for prevention of nausea and vomiting during chemotherapy: a double-blind, double-dummy, randomised, comparative phase III trial. Lancet Oncol 2009; 10: 115–124.
15.	Brygger L, Herrstedt J. 5-hydroxytryptamine3 receptor antagonists and cardiac side effects. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2014; 13: 1407–1422.
16.	Boccia RV, Gordan LN, Clark G et al. Efﬁcacy and tolerability of transdermal granisetron for the control of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting associated with moderately and highly emetogenic multi-day chemotherapy: a randomized, double-blind, phase III study. Support Care Cancer 2011; 19: 1609–1617.
17.	Karthaus M, Tibor C, Lorusso V et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of oral palonosetron compared with IV palonosetron administered with dexamethasone for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in patients with solid tumors receiving cisplatin-based highly emetogenic chemotherapy (HEC). Support Care Cancer 2015; 23: 2917–2923.
18.	Boccia R, Grunberg S, Franco-Gonzales E et al. Efﬁcacy of oral palonosetron compared to intravenous palonosetron for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting associated with moderately emetogenic chemotherapy: a phase 3 trial. Support Care Cancer 2013; 21: 1453–1460.
19.	Van Laere K, De Hoon J, Bormans G et al. Equivalent dynamic human brain NK1- receptor occupancy following single-dose i.v. fosaprepitant vs. oral aprepitant as assessed by PET imaging. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2012; 92: 243–250.
20.	Navari RM, Gray SE, Kerr AC. Olanzapine versus aprepitant for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: a randomized phase III trial. J Support Oncol 2011; 9: 188–195.
21.	Abe M, Hirashima Y, Kasamatsu Y et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of olanzapine combined with aprepitant, palonosetron, and dexamethasone for preventing nausea and vomiting induced by cisplatin-based chemotherapy in gynecological cancer: KCOG-G1301 phase II trial. Support Care Cancer 2016; 24: 675–682.
22.	Navari RM, Qin R, Ruddy KJ et al. Olanzapine for the prevention of chemotherapy- induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) in patients receiving highly emetogenic chemotherapy (HEC): Alliance A221301, a randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled trial. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33 (Suppl. 29S): abstr 176.
23.	Popovic M, Warr DG, Deangelis C et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of palonosetron for the prophylaxis of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV): a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Support Care Cancer 2014; 22: 1685–1697.
24.	The Italian Group for Antiemetic Research. Dexamethasone alone or in combination with ondansetron for the prevention of delayed nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 1554–1559.
25.	Inoue A, Yamada Y, Matsumura Y et al. Randomized study of dexamethasone treatment for delayed emesis, anorexia and fatigue induced by irinotecan. Support Care Cancer 2003; 11: 528–532.
26.	Hesketh PJ, Bosnjak SM, Nikolic V, Rapoport B. Incidence of delayed nausea and vomiting in patients with colorectal cancer receiving irinotecan-based chemotherapy. Support Care Cancer 2011; 19: 2063–2066.
27.	Rapoport BL, Jordan K, Boice JA et al. Aprepitant for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting associated with a broad range of moderately emetogenic chemotherapies and tumor types: a randomized, double- blind study. Support Care Cancer 2010; 18: 423–431.
28.	Weinstein C, Jordan K, Green SA et al. Single-dose fosaprepitant for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting associated with moderately emetogenic chemotherapy: results of a randomized, double-blind phase III trial. Ann Oncol 2016; 27: 172–178.
29.	Hesketh PJ, Schnadig ID, Schwartzberg LS et al. Efﬁcacy of the neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist rolapitant in preventing nausea and vomiting in patients receiving carboplatin-based chemotherapy. Cancer 2016; 122: 2418–2425.
30.	Tanioka M, Kitao A, Matsumoto K et al. A randomized, placebo controlled, double- blind study of aprepitant in nondrinking women younger than 70 years receiving moderately emetogenic chemotherapy. Br J Cancer 2013; 109: 859–865.
31.	Yahata H, Kobayashi H, Sonoda K et al. Efﬁcacy of aprepitant for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting with a moderately emetogenic chemotherapy regimen: a multicenter, placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized study in patients with gynecologic cancer receiving paclitaxel and carboplatin. Int J Clin Oncol 2016; 21: 491–497.
 

32.	Ito Y, Karayama M, Inui N et al. Aprepitant in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer receiving carboplatin-based chemotherapy. Lung Cancer 2014; 84: 259–264.
33.	Hesketh PJ, Wright O, Rosati G et al. Single-dose intravenous casopitant in combination with ondansetron and dexamethasone for the prevention of oxaliplatin-induced nausea and vomiting: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, active-controlled, two arm, parallel group study. Support Care Cancer 2012; 20: 1471–1478.
34.	Nishimura J, Satoh T, Fukunaga M et al. Combination antiemetic therapy with aprepitant/fosaprepitant in patients with colorectal cancer receiving oxaliplatin- based chemotherapy (SENRI trial): a multicentre, randomised, controlled phase 3 trial. Eur J Cancer 2015; 51: 1274–1282.
35.	Albany C, Brames MJ, Fausel C et al. Randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled phase III crossover study evaluating the oral neurokinin-1 antagonist aprepitant in combination with a 5HT3 receptor antagonist and dexamethasone in patients with germ cell tumors receiving 5 day-cisplatin combination chemotherapy regimens: a Hoosier Oncology Group (HOG) study. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 3998–4003.
36.	Olver IN, Grimison P, Chatﬁeld M et al. Results of a 7-day aprepitant schedule for the prevention of nausea and vomiting in a 5-day cisplatin-based germ cell tumor chemotherapy. Support Care Cancer 2013; 21: 1561–1568.
37.	Hamada S, Hinotsu S, Kawai K et al. Antiemetic efﬁcacy and safety of a combination of palonosetron, aprepitant and dexamethasone in patients with testicular germ cell tumor receiving 5-day cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy. Support Care Cancer 2014; 22: 2161–2166.
38.	Keat CH, Phua G, Abdul Kassim MS et al. Can granisetron injection used as primary prophylaxis improve the control of nausea and vomiting with low- emetogenic chemotherapy? Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 2013; 14: 469–473.
39.	Fabi A, Barduagni M, Lauro S et al. Is delayed chemotherapy-induced emesis well managed in oncological clinical practice? An observational study. Support Care Cancer 2003; 11: 156–161.
40.	Molassiotis A, Saunders MP, Valle J et al. A prospective observational study of chemotherapy-related nausea and vomiting in routine practice in a UK cancer centre. Support Care Cancer 2008; 16: 201–208.
41.	Navari RM, Nagy CK, Gray SE. The use of olanzapine versus metoclopramide for the treatment of breakthrough chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in patients receiving highly emetogenic chemotherapy. Support Care Cancer 2013; 21: 1655–1663.
42.	Chanthawong S, Subongkot S, Sookprasert A. Effective of olanzapine for the treatment of breakthrough chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. J Med Assoc Thai 2014; 97: 349–355.
43.	Sigsgaard T, Herrstedt J, Handberg J et al. Ondansetron plus metopimazine compared with ondansetron plus metopimazine plus prednisolone as antiemetic prophylaxis in patients receiving multiple cycles of moderately emetogenic chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol 2001; 19: 2091–2097.
44.	Chan A, Kim HK, Hsieh RK et al. Incidence and predictors of anticipatory nausea and vomiting in Asia Paciﬁc clinical practice—a longitudinal analysis. Support Care Cancer 2015; 23: 283–291.
45.	Molassiotis A, Lee PH, Burke TA et al. Anticipatory nausea, risk factors and its impact on chemotherapy-related nausea and vomiting: results from the Pan European Emesis Registry study. J Pain Symptom Manage 2016; 51: 987–993.
46.	Kamen C, Tejani MA, Chandwani K et al. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy. Eur J Pharmacol 2014; 722: 172–179.
47.	Molassiotis A, Aapro M, Dicato M et al. Evaluation of risk factors predicting chemotherapy-related nausea and vomiting: results from a European prospective observational study. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 47: 839–848.
48.	Dupuis LL, Robinson PD, Boodhan S et al. Guideline for the prevention and treatment of anticipatory nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy in pediatric cancer patients. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2014; 61: 1506–1512.
49.	Pielichowski W, Barzal J, Gawronski K et al. A triple-drug combination to prevent nausea and vomiting following BEAM chemotherapy before autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Transplant Proc 2011; 43: 3107–3110.
50.	Bechtel T, McBride A, Crawford B et al. Aprepitant for the control of delayed nausea and  vomiting associated  with the use of high-dose melphalan for
 

autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplants in patients with multiple myeloma: a phase II study. Support Care Cancer 2014; 22: 2911–2916.
51.	Stiff PJ, Fox-Geiman MP, Kiley K et al. Prevention of nausea and vomiting associated with stem cell transplant: results of a prospective, randomized trial of aprepitant used with highly emetogenic preparative regimens. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2013; 19: 49–55.
52.	Schmitt T, Goldschmidt H, Neben K et al. Aprepitant, granisetron, and dexamethasone for prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting after high-dose melphalan in autologous transplantation for multiple myeloma: results of a randomized, placebo-controlled phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 3413–3420.
53.	Enblom A, Bergius Axelsson B, Steineck G et al. One third of patients with radiotherapy-induced nausea consider their antiemetic treatment insufﬁcient. Support Care Cancer 2009; 17: 23–32.
54.	The Italian Group for Antiemetic Research in Radiotherapy. Radiation-induced emesis: a prospective observational multicenter Italian trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999; 44: 619–625.
55.	Maranzano E, De Angelis V, Pergolizzi S et al. A prospective observational trial on emesis in radiotherapy: analysis of 1020 patients recruited in 45 Italian radiation oncology centres. Radiother Oncol 2010; 94: 36–41.
56.	Salvo N, Doble B, Khan L et al. Prophylaxis of radiation-induced nausea and vomiting using 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 serotonin receptor antagonists: a systematic review of randomized trials. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2012; 82: 408–417.
57.	Dennis K, Makhani L, Maranzano E et al. Timing and duration of 5-HT3 receptor antagonist therapy for the prophylaxis of radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: a systematic review of randomized and non-randomized studies. J Radiat Oncol 2013; 2: 271–284.
58.	Ruhlmann CH, Christensen TB, Dohn LH et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of fosaprepitant for the prevention of nausea and emesis during 5 weeks of chemoradiotherapy for cervical cancer (the GAND-emesis study): a multinational, randomised, placebo- controlled, double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17: 509–518.
59.	Bakhshi S, Batra A, Biswas B et al. Aprepitant as an add-on therapy in children receiving highly emetogenic chemotherapy: a randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled trial. Support Care Cancer 2015; 23: 3229–3237.
60.	Kang H, Loftus S, Taylor A et al. Aprepitant for the prevention of chemotherapy- induced nausea and vomiting in children: a randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 385–394.
61.	Gupta M, Davis M, LeGrand S et al. Nausea and vomiting in advanced cancer: the Cleveland Clinic protocol. J Support Oncol, 2013; 11: 8–13.
62.	Bruera ED, MacEachern TJ, Spachynski KA et al. Comparison of the efﬁcacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics of controlled release and immediate release metoclopramide for the management of chronic nausea in patients with advanced cancer. Cancer 1994; 74: 3204–3211.
63.	Bruera E, Belzile M, Neumann C et al. A double-blind, crossover study of controlled-release metoclopramide and placebo for the chronic nausea and dyspepsia of advanced cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage 2000; 19: 427–435.
64.	Currow DC, Quinn S, Agar M et al. Double-blind, placebo controlled, randomized trial of octreotide in malignant bowel obstruction. J Pain Symptom Manage 2015; 49: 814–821.
65.	Peng X, Wang P, Li S et al. Randomized clinical trial comparing octreotide and scopolamine butylbromide in symptom control of patients with inoperable bowel obstruction due to advanced ovarian cancer. World J Surg Oncol 2015; 13: 50 doi: 10.1186/s12957-015-0455-3.
66.	Laval G, Rousselot H, Toussaint-Martel S et al. SALTO: a randomized, multicenter study assessing octreotide LAR in inoperable bowel obstruction. Bull Cancer 2012; 99: E1–E9.
67.	Mariani P, Blumberg J, Landau A et al. Symptomatic treatment with lanreotide microparticles in inoperable bowel obstruction resulting from peritoneal carcinomatosis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III Study. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 4337–4343.
68.	Laugsand EA, Kaasa S, Klepstad P. Management of opioid-induced nausea and vomiting in cancer patients: systematic review and evidence-based recommendations. Palliat Med 2011; 25: 442–453.
