
 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
 
Annals of Oncology 29 (Supplement 4): iv30–iv40, 2018 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy133
Published online 6 June 2018
 

 

 

R. Willemze1, E. Hodak2, P. L. Zinzani3, L. Specht4 & M. Ladetto5, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands; 2Department of Dermatology, Rabin Medical Centre, Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel; 3Institute of Hematology and Medical Oncology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; 4Department of Oncology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 5Divisione di Ematologia, Azienda Ospedaliera Santi Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland. E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: December 2006, last update January 2018. This publication supersedes the previously published version—Ann Oncol 2013; 24 (Suppl. 6): vi149–vi154.


 


Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCLs)
 


are defined as non-
 
immunoglobulin gene rearrangements in lesional skin or peripheral blood may be a valuable adjunct in selected cases. However, clinical and histopathological features are, in most cases, the most import-
 
Hodgkin lymphomas that present in the skin with no evidence of
extracutaneous disease at the time of diagnosis. After gastrointes- tinal lymphomas, PCLs are the second most common group of extranodal non-Hodgkin lymphomas, with an estimated annual incidence of 1/100 000 in Western countries. PCLs must be distin- guished from nodal or systemic malignant lymphomas involving the skin secondarily, which often have another clinical behaviour, have a different prognosis and require a different therapeutic ap- proach. In recent lymphoma classifications, PCLs are therefore included as separate entities. Within the group of PCLs, distinct types of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) and cutaneous B cell lymphoma (CBCL) can be distinguished [1, 2]. In the Western world, CTCLs constitute ~75%–80% of all PCLs [with mycosis fungoides (MF) as the most common type of CTCL] and CBCL
~20%–25% [1]. However, different distributions have been
observed in other parts of the world. In Southeast Asian countries, CTCLs other than MF [in particular Epstein–Barr virus-associated natural killer (NK)/T cell lymphomas] are much more common than in Western countries, while CBCLs are much more uncom- mon [3, 4]. PCLs are rare diseases and patients should ideally be seen by a multidisciplinary team of dermatologists, pathologists, haematologists and radiation oncologists.


The diagnosis and classification of PCLs should always be based on a combination of clinical, histological, immunophenotypical and genetic data. Demonstration of clonal T cell receptor or
 
ant deciding factors for therapeutic planning. PCLs should be clas- sified according to the criteria of the revised 2017 World Health Organization (WHO) classification ( see Table 1) [2].


 
In all cases, adequate staging should be carried out to exclude the presence of extracutaneous disease. Recommendations for the initial  staging  of  patients  with  MF/Se´zary  syndrome  (SS)  are presented in Table 2. Flow cytometry of the peripheral blood is usually recommended for all stages of MF. However, it is debatable whether this test is justified in patients who are not suspected to have SS. Computed tomography (CT) and/or fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scans are optional in early-stage MF. Bone marrow examination is usually not indicated in patients with MF/SS.
Initial work-up for patients with a PCL other than MF/SS also includes complete physical examination, representative skin bi- opsy, complete and differential blood cell count, routine serum biochemistry with lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and appropriate imaging studies (CT and/or FDG-PET scans) [5]. In PCLs with a predominantly subcutaneous presentation, such as subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphoma (SPTCL) and primary cutane- ous gamma/delta T cell lymphoma (PCGD-TCL), FDG-PET is essential to evaluate the extent of disease. In patients with typical lymphomatoid papulosis (LyP) or primary cutaneous CD4þ small/medium T cell lymphoproliferative disorder (LPD), CT and FDG-PET scans are not required. Bone marrow biopsy and
 


VC   The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
Annals of Oncology	Clinical Practice Guidelines

 
aspirate should be carried out in cutaneous lymphomas with an intermediate or aggressive clinical behaviour but is not required in cutaneous lymphomas with an indolent clinical behaviour, unless indicated by other staging assessments [5, 6]. Bone marrow examin- ation is not indicated in patients with primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma (PCMZL), but its significance in primary cutane- ous follicle centre lymphomas (PCFCLs) is controversial [5, 7].
Prognosis is extremely variable depending on the type of PCLs and the stage of disease. For clinical staging of MF and SS, the revised tumour, node, metastasis and blood (TNMB) staging sys- tem should be used (Tables 3 and 4) [6]. Apart from clinical stage, older age, large cell transformation and increased LDH values have been identified as independent unfavourable prognostic fac- tors in MF [8–10]. For PCLs other than MF/SS, a separate TNM classification system has been published [5]. This staging system is primarily meant to document extent of disease and cannot be used as a prognostic guide.


 
The choice of treatment depends on the type of PCL and the stage of disease. Due to their heterogeneity and rarity, controlled clin- ical trials in PCLs are almost non-existent, with a few exceptions mainly concerning recently marketed drugs. Recommendations are therefore largely based on (retrospective) cohort studies and expert opinions discussed during consensus meetings of the
 





European Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) Cutaneous Lymphoma Group, the International Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas (ISCL), the United States Cutaneous Lymphoma Consortium (USCLC) and the International Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group (ILROG), including consensus recommendations for clinical end points and response criteria in MF/SS [11].

Mycosis fungoides and variants
Since early aggressive chemotherapy (ChT) is associated with considerable side effects but does not improve survival, a stage- adapted conservative therapeutic approach is recommended for MF and its variants [12–15]. Patients with only patches and/or
plaques covering < 10% (stage IA) or ≥ 10% of the skin surface (stage IB) should be treated with skin-directed therapies, includ-
ing topical steroids, psoralens plus ultraviolet A (PUVA), narrow-band ultraviolet B (nb-UVB) and topical cytostatic agents, such as mechlorethamine (nitrogen mustard) (Figure 1). nb-UVB is recommended for patients with patches or very thin plaques but PUVA is preferred for patients with thicker plaques [III, A] [13, 15]. Topical steroids can be recommended as mono- therapy for stage IA disease with patches/flat plaques. In stage IB,
 
Clinical Practice Guidelines	Annals of Oncology

 

















topical steroids can be used as adjuvant therapy for selected skin lesions. Topical application of mechlorethamine, either in aque- ous solution or in an ointment-based preparation, has been used successfully for decades in the treatment of early-stage MF. A commercial 0.02% gel preparation was approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) as an orphan drug for the treatment of early stage MF [II, B] [16]. In patients developing one or few infiltrated plaques or tumours (stage IIB), additional low-dose local radiotherapy (RT) may suffice [III, A] [17]. Local RT can be curative in patients with early localised disease, par- ticularly in patients with unilesional MF and pagetoid reticulosis [IV, A]. In such patients, local RT is most commonly adminis- tered with electrons (energy dependent on the thickness of the lesion), with bolus to achieve full skin dose, a margin of ≥ 2 cm and a total dose of 20–24 Gy [IV, A] [18]. For patients with more extensive infiltrated plaques and tumours, or patients refractory to skin-directed therapies, systemic therapy with interferon alpha (IFNa) or retinoids (including bexarotene), commonly com- bined with PUVA or other skin-directed therapies, or a combin- ation of IFNa and retinoids or total skin electron beam therapy (TSEBT), can be considered [III, B] [13, 15, 19]. TSEBT was often given to total doses of 30–36 Gy, but lower doses (10–12 Gy) have been employed with the advantages of shorter duration of the treatment period, fewer side effects and opportunity for re-
 
treatment [III, A] [20, 21]. In patients with advanced and refrac- tory disease, gemcitabine or liposomal doxorubicin may be con- sidered, but responses are generally short-lived [II, B] [22, 23]. Other agents like the fusion toxin denileukin diftitox and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, such as vorinostat and romidep- sin, have been approved in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients with relapsed and re- fractory CTCL, but have not yet been registered for CTCL in Europe [24–26]. Multi-agent ChT is only indicated in patients with effaced lymph nodes or visceral involvement (stage IV), or in patients with widespread tumour stage MF, which cannot be controlled with skin-targeted and immunomodulating therapies or who failed single-agent ChT, but—similar to single-agent ChT—responses are generally short-lived [IV, B] [27]. Local pal- liation of cutaneous as well as extracutaneous lesions may be achieved with local RT to doses ≥ 8 Gy [III, A] [17].
Recent studies report high response rates of brentuximab vedotin (BV; an anti-CD30 monoclonal antibody coupled to the anti- tubulin agent monomethyl auristatin E) in patients with advanced MF/SS expressing CD30 [II, B] [28–30]. In a phase II trial including 28 patients with CD30þ relapsed or refractory MF, BV showed a 54% overall response rate (ORR) with a median time to response of 12 weeks and a median duration of response of 32 weeks in patients with MF, independent of the degree of CD30 expression [28]. Another phase II study reported an ORR of 70% in a group of 32 patients with relapsed or refractory MF/SS with a wide range of CD30 expression levels [29]. Results from a recent phase III trial, which compared BV to physician’s choice of methotrexate (MTX) or bexarotene in 128 patients with relapsed or refractory CD30þ CTCL, including 97 patients with MF, showed ORR lasting at least 4 months (ORR4) and complete response (CR) rate of 50% and 10%, respectively, in MF patients treated with BV compared with 10% and 0%, respectively, in the control group [30]. Median progression-free survival (mPFS) was 15.9 months in the BV group compared with 3.5 months in the control group.
In relatively young patients with refractory, progressive MF or with SS, allogeneic stem cell transplantation (alloSCT) should be considered. Durable responses have been reported, but experi- ence is still limited and the optimal conditioning regimen and the optimal timing for an allogeneic transplant are currently
 

 	 
Figure 1. Recommendations for the treatment of MF/SS.
aMost commonly PUVA.
AlloSCT, allogeneic stem cell transplantation; ChT, chemotherapy; ECP, extracorporeal photopheresis; IFNa, interferon alpha; MF, mycosis fungoides; MTX, methotrexate; nb-UVB, narrow- band ultraviolet B; PUVA, psoralens plus ultraviolet A; RT, radiotherapy; SS, Se´zary syndrome; SDT, skin-directed therapy; TSEBT, total skin electron beam therapy.
 
Clinical Practice Guidelines	Annals of Oncology
 
unknown [V, C] [31]. Recent studies suggest that patients may benefit from tumour debulking with TSEBT or BV before trans- plantation [32, 33]. Results with autologous stem cell transplant- ation (ASCT) in MF and SS have been disappointing.
Promising new drugs are currently under evaluation in clinical trials, including mogamulizumab [34–36]. A phase I/II open-label multicentre, randomised clinical trial demonstrated an ORR of 47% for SS patients and 29% in MF patients, with a dramatic clear- ance of malignant cells from the peripheral blood in 18 of 19 patients with blood involvement [35]. An open-label multicentre randomised phase III study comparing mogamulizumab with vor- inostat in 372 patients with relapsed or refractory MF or SS showed a significantly better ORR (28% versus 5%) and PFS (7.7 months versus 3.1 months) in the mogamulizumab group [36].

Se´zary syndrome
SS is defined by a triad of erythroderma, generalised lymphaden- opathy and the presence of clonally related neoplastic T cells with cerebriform nuclei (Se´zary cells) in skin, lymph nodes and periph- eral blood [1, 2]. Being a systemic disease (i.e. leukaemia) by defin- ition, systemic treatment is required (Figure 1). Skin-directed therapies like PUVA or potent topical steroids may be used as ad- juvant therapy. Extracorporeal photopheresis (ECP), either alone or in combination with other treatment modalities such as IFNa, retinoids, TSEBT and PUVA, has been suggested as the treatment of choice in SS and erythrodermic MF [IV, B] [13–15]. ORRs range
 
from 30% to 80% with CR rates ranging from 14% to 25%, de- pending on the ECP regimen and the type of combination used. However, the suggested superiority of ECP over the traditional low-dose ChT regimens has not yet been substantiated by con- trolled randomised trials [37]. Prolonged treatment with a com- bination of low-dose chlorambucil and prednisone is often effective in controlling the disease but is unlikely to yield complete responses. Low-dose alemtuzumab (10 mg subcutaneous, 3 times weekly for 12 weeks) [IV, A], single-agent ChT (gemcitabine, PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin) [V, B], multi-agent ChT [IV, B] and alloSCT [IV, C] have been recommended as second-line treatment of SS [13, 15, 38]. It should be emphasised that compari- son of treatment results in the different studies is almost impos- sible due to differences in diagnostic criteria used for SS.

Primary cutaneous CD301 lymphoproliferative disorders
The group of primary cutaneous CD30þ LPDs includes primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma (C-ALCL) and LyP, which form a spectrum of disease. Both C-ALCL and LyP have an excellent prognosis, with a 10-year survival of 90% and almost 100%, respectively [39]. LyP is clinically characterised by recur- rent, self-healing papulonecrotic or papulonodular skin lesions. Since a curative therapy is not available and none of the available treatment modalities affects the natural course of the disease, in patients with relatively few non-scarring lesions, an expectant
 

 
Figure 2. Recommendations for the initial management of primary cutaneous CD30þ LPDs.
C-A	LCL, cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma; LPD, lymphoproliferative disorder; LyP, lymphomatoid papulosis; MTX, methotrexate; PUVA, psoralens plus ultraviolet A; RT, radiotherapy.
 
Annals of Oncology	Clinical Practice Guidelines
 
policy can be followed (Figure 2). In the case of cosmetically disturbing lesions (e.g. scarring or many papulonodules), low- dose oral MTX (5–20 mg/week) and PUVA are the most effective therapies for reducing the number of skin lesions [IV, A] [39– 41]. Relapses after withdrawal of treatment are common and maintenance treatment is often required for adequate disease control. Patients with C-ALCL generally present with solitary or localised (ulcerating) tumours or nodules and should be treated with RT or surgical excision (Figure 2). In case of complete spon- taneous remission, no further therapy is required [39]. Patients presenting with multifocal skin lesions can best be treated with low-dose MTX, as in LyP [IV, A], or with RT [IV, A] in the case of only a few lesions [39, 40, 42]. The ILROG suggests radiation with electrons, with bolus, a margin of ≥ 2 cm and a total dose of 24–30 Gy [18, 43]. In a recent study in 63 patients with C-ALCL, a total dose of 20 Gy in 8–10 fractions was found to be effective and well-tolerated in patients presenting with solitary or localised skin lesions. For patients with multifocal or relapsing skin lesions, a radiation dose of 8 Gy (2 × 4 Gy) was suggested [44].
Recent studies report high response rates of BV in patients with primary cutaneous CD30þ lymphoproliferations [28–30]. In the phase III trial, which compared BV to physician’s choice of MTX or bexarotene, BV showed an ORR4 and CR rate of 75% and 31%, respectively, in C-ALCL patients treated with BV compared with 20% and 7%, respectively, in the control group [30]. BV should be considered in cases with multifocal skin lesions refractory to con- ventional therapies and in patients developing extracutaneous dis- ease [II, B] [42]. Multi-agent ChT is only indicated in patients presenting with or developing extracutaneous disease and in rare patients with rapidly progressive skin disease [39, 40].

Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphomas
The term SPTCL is only used for cases with an a/b T cell pheno- type, which have a favourable prognosis, particularly if not associ- ated with a haemophagocytic syndrome (HPS), which is frequently an extremely aggressive clinical syndrome requiring im- mediate intervention. One study reported 5-year overall survival (OS) rates of 91% and 46% in SPTCL patients without and with an HPS, respectively [45]. In SPTCL without associated HPS, system- ic steroids or other immunosuppressive agents (ciclosporin, MTX) should be considered first; in cases of solitary skin lesions, RT with electrons is advised [IV, A]. Little information on radiation dose is available, but a dose of 40 Gy has been used. Bexarotene may be also effective in SPTCL [46]. Multi-agent ChT is required only in cases with progressive disease not responding to immunosuppres- sive therapy and in cases with HPS.

Primary cutaneous extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, nasal type
Primary cutaneous extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, nasal type is an Epstein–Barr virus-associated type of lymphoma with an aggres- sive clinical behaviour, which is very rare in Western countries, but more common in Asia and Central and South America [2]. The skin is the second most common site of involvement after the nasal cavity/nasopharynx and, in some patients, skin lesions may be the only manifestation of disease [47–49]. Patients presenting with only localised skin lesions (stage IE) have a somewhat better prognosis
 
than localised lesions in non-cutaneous sites [48, 49]. In rare cases with small, solitary lesions, RT alone can be considered, as long- term disease control has been achieved with this approach in some reported cases [V, C] [50–52]. This is also the option for older or frail patients who cannot tolerate intensive ChT. In general, how- ever, combined modality treatment with L-asparaginase containing ChT, such as SMILE (dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosfamide, L- asparaginase and etoposide) is the preferred mode of treatment, combined with RT, for localised disease, as it is for nasal NK/T cell lymphomas, although there is still a paucity of data on the outcome of this treatment in primary cutaneous NK/T cell lymphoma [V, B] [53]. Recommended radiation doses are higher than for other lym- phomas, with 50 Gy to the initial lesion and a boost of 5–10 Gy to residual disease [IV, A] [18]. In patients presenting with generalised skin lesions, the disease shows an aggressive clinical behaviour and should be treated as other patients with stage II–IV disease [53].

Primary cutaneous peripheral T cell lymphoma-not otherwise specified
Within the group of primary cutaneous peripheral T cell lymphoma-not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS), four somewhat better-defined subgroups have been included as (provisional) enti- ties (see Table 1) [1, 2]. These include PCGD-TCL, primary cutane- ous aggressive epidermotropic CD8þ cytotoxic T cell lymphoma (CD8þ AECTCL), primary cutaneous CD4þ small/medium T cell LPD and primary cutaneous acral CD8þ T cell lymphoma. For cases that do not fit into one of the well-defined types of CTCL, including these rare subtypes, the term primary cutaneous PTCL-NOS is maintained. Both PCGD-TCL and CD8þ AECTCL have in com- mon a generally aggressive clinical course and poor prognosis, and should therefore be managed according to the ESMO guidelines for PTCL-NOS [53]. Patients with primary cutaneous CD4þ small-me- dium T cell LPD and patients with a primary cutaneous acral CD8þ T cell lymphoma have an indolent clinical behaviour and excellent prognosis. Patients usually present with a solitary skin lesion, which should be treated with local RT or surgical excision [IV, A].

Cutaneous B cell lymphoma
In the WHO-EORTC classification, three main types of CBCL are distinguished: PCMZL, PCFCL and primary cutaneous diffuse large B cell lymphoma, leg type (PCLBCL-LT). PCMZL and PCFCL are indolent types of CBCL with a disease-related 10-year-survival exceeding 90%, while PCLBCL-LT has a more unfavourable prognosis (disease-related 5-year survival, approxi- mately 50%). EORTC/ISCL consensus recommendations for the management of these three types of CBCL have been formulated and are, with minor modifications, presented in Figures 3 and 4 [54]. Recommended radiation doses for localised PCMZL and PCFCL are 24–30 Gy [IV, A], whereas for palliative treatment of multifocal disease, low-dose RT (4 Gy) is often sufficient [III, A] [17, 18]. For the more aggressive PCLBCL-LT, systemic treatment with rituximab/cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vin- cristine/prednisone (R-CHOP) is recommended if the patient can tolerate multi-agent ChT [IV, A]. For localised disease, the systemic treatment is combined with RT, and a radiation dose of 36–40 Gy is recommended; if no systemic treatment is given, a dose of 40 Gy is recommended [IV, B] [18]. These patients are often elderly, and for disseminated or recurrent disease,
 
Clinical Practice Guidelines	Annals of Oncology
Figure 3. Recommendations for the initial management of PCMZL and PCFCL.
aIn the case of evidence for Borrelia burgdorferi infection.
bSingle or combination chemotherapy appropriate for low-grade malignant B cell lymphomas.
ChT, chemotherapy; i.l., intralesional; i.v., intravenous; PCFCL, primary cutaneous follicle centre lymphoma; PCMZL, primary cutaneous margin- al zone lymphoma; RT, radiotherapy.



Figure 4. Recommendations for the initial management of PCLBCL-LT.
IFRT, involved-ﬁeld radiotherapy; i.v., intravenous; PCLBCL-LT, primary cutaneous large B cell lymphoma, leg type; R-CHOP, rituximab/cyclo- phosphamide/doxorubicin/vincristine/prednisone; RT, radiotherapy.
 
Annals of Oncology	Clinical Practice Guidelines
Table 5. Summary of recommendations

Incidence and epidemiology
•	PCLs must be distinguished from nodal or systemic malignant lymphomas involving the skin secondarily. In recent lymphoma classiﬁcations, PCLs are included as separate entities
Diagnosis and pathology/molecular biology
•	The diagnosis and classiﬁcation of PCLs should be based on a combination of clinical, histological, immunophenotypical and genetic data
Staging and risk assessment
•	Adequate staging should be carried out to exclude the presence of extracutaneous disease
•	Initial work-up for patients with a PCL includes complete physical examination, representative skin biopsy, complete and differential blood cell count, routine serum biochemistry with LDH and appropriate imaging studies
•	In PCLs with a predominantly subcutaneous presentation (such as SPTCL and PCGD-TCL), FDG-PET is essential to evaluate the extent of disease
Treatment
•	The choice of treatment depends on the type of PCL and the stage of disease. Due to their heterogeneity and rarity, controlled clinical trials in PCLs are almost non-existent, with a few exceptions mainly concerning recently marketed drugs
•	Recommendations are largely based on (retrospective) cohort studies and expert opinions
Mycosis fungoides and variants
•	In MF and its variants, a stage-adapted conservative therapeutic approach is recommended
•	Patients with early-stage MF (stage IA–IIA) should be treated with skin-directed therapies including topical steroids, PUVA, nb-UVB or mechlorethamine
•	nb-UVB can be used in patients with patches or very thin plaques. In patients with thicker plaques, PUVA therapy is preferred [III, A]
•	In patients developing one or few inﬁltrated plaques or tumours (stage IIB), additional low-dose local RT may sufﬁce [III, A]
•	Local RT can be curative in patients with unilesional MF and pagetoid reticulosis [IV, A]. Recommended dose is 20–24 Gy [IV, A]
•	For patients with more extensive inﬁltrated plaques and tumours or patients refractory to skin-directed therapies, a combination of PUVA and IFNa or PUVA and retinoids (including bexarotene), a combination of IFNa and retinoids or TSEBT can be considered [III, B]
•	TSEBT has been given to total doses of 30–36 Gy, but recently lower doses (10–12 Gy) have been employed with the advantages of shorter duration of
the treatment period, fewer side effects and opportunity for re-treatment [III, A]
•	In patients with advanced and refractory disease, gemcitabine or liposomal doxorubicin may be considered, but responses are generally short-lived [II, B]
•	Multi-agent ChT is only indicated in MF patients with effaced lymph nodes or visceral involvement (stage IV), or in patients with widespread tumour stage MF, which cannot be controlled with skin-targeted and immunomodulating therapies or who failed single-agent ChT
•	Local palliation of cutaneous and as well as extracutaneous lesions may be achieved with local RT to doses ≥ 8 Gy [III, A]
•	In relatively young patients with refractory, progressive MF alloSCT should be considered. The optimal conditioning regimen and timing for an allogeneic transplant are currently unknown [IV, C]
Se´zary syndrome
•	Systemic treatment is required in combination with skin-directed therapies like PUVA or potent topical steroids used as adjuvant therapy
•	ECP, either alone or in combination with other treatment modalities such as IFNa, retinoids, TSEBT and PUVA, has been suggested as the treatment of choice in SS and erythrodermic MF [IV, B]
•	Mogulizumab has shown signiﬁcant clinical efﬁcacy in MF/SS, particularly in patients with blood involvement
•	In relatively young patients with refractory, progressive SS, alloSCT should be considered. The optimal conditioning regimen and timing for an allogeneic transplant are currently unknown [IV, C]
•	Low-dose alemtuzumab (10 mg subcutaneous, 3 times weekly for 12 weeks) [IV, A], single-agent ChT (gemcitabine, PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin)
[V, B], multi-agent ChT [IV. B] and alloSCT [IV. C] are recommended as second-line treatment of SS.
Primary cutaneous CD30þ lymphoproliferative disorders (C-ALCL and LyP)
•	In the case of cosmetically disturbing lesions (e.g. scarring or many papulonodules), low-dose oral MTX (5–20 mg/week) and PUVA are the most effective therapies for reducing the number of skin lesions [IV, A]
•	Local RT is the ﬁrst choice of treatment in patients with C-ALCL presenting with solitary or localised skin lesions. A total dose of 20 Gy is recommended
•	C-ALCL patients presenting with multifocal skin lesions can best be treated with low-dose MTX, as in LyP [IV, A], or RT [IV, A] in the case of only a few lesions
•	BV should be considered in C-ALCL patients with multifocal skin lesions refractory to conventional therapies and patients developing extracutaneous
disease [II, B]
•	Multi-agent ChT is only indicated in patients presenting with or developing extracutaneous disease and in rare patients with rapidly progressive skin disease
Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphomas
•	In SPTCL without associated HPS, systemic steroids or other immunosuppressive agents (ciclosporin; MTX) are the ﬁrst choice of treatment. In cases of solitary skin lesions, RT with electrons is advised [IV, A]
•	Multi-agent ChT is required only in cases with progressive disease not responding to immunosuppressive therapy and in cases with HPS
Primary cutaneous extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, nasal type
•	Primary cutaneous extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma is an aggressive lymphoma. Combined modality treatment with L-asparaginase containing ChT, such as SMILE (dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosphamide, L-asparaginase, etoposide), combined with RT for patients with localised disease, is the preferred mode of treatment [V, B], In rare cases with small, solitary lesions, and in older or frail patients who cannot tolerate intensive ChT, RT alone can be considered [V, C]
Continued
 
Clinical Practice Guidelines	Annals of Oncology
Primary cutaneous peripheral T cell lymphoma - not otherwise speciﬁed
•	PCGD-TCL and primary cutaneous CD8þ AECTCL are aggressive types of CTCL, which should be managed as systemic PTCL-NOS
•	Patients with a primary cutaneous CD4þ small-medium T cell LPD or a primary cutaneous acral CD8þ T cell lymphoma usually present with a solitary skin lesion, which should be treated with local RT or surgical excision [IV, A]
Cutaneous B cell lymphoma
•	Recommended radiation doses for localised PCMZL and PCFCL are 24-30 Gy [IV, A]. For palliative treatment of multifocal disease, low-dose RT (4 Gy) is often sufﬁcient [IV, A]
•	For the more aggressive PCLBCL-LT, systemic treatment with R-CHOP combined with RT at a radiation dose of (36–40 Gy) is recommended for localised
disease if the patient can tolerate multi-agent ChT [IV, A]. If no systemic treatment is given, a dose of 40 Gy is recommended [IV, B]
•	PCLBCL-LT has the phenotype and gene expression proﬁle of ABC-type DLBCL and should be treated as other ABC-type DLBCLs
Personalised medicine
•	BV is used for the treatment of advanced stage refractory or relapsed CD30þ CTCL, including both patients with C-ALCL and patients with MF/SS, also with the purpose of bridging eligible patients with MF/SS to an alloSCT
•	PCLBCL-LT shows a high frequency of MYD88 and CD79B mutations
•	The efﬁcacy of BTK inhibitors, which targets this pathway, is currently under investigation
Follow-up, long-term implications and survivorship
•	Follow-up recommendations should be individualised depending on the clinical situation. The frequency of follow-up visits varies depending on PCL type and the stage of disease from every 6 or 12 months in patients with indolent types of PCL and stable disease or patients in complete remission to every 4–6 weeks in patients with active or progressive disease
•	Follow-up visits should focus on history and physical examination, with additional testing only if required. Routine imaging after treatment is not required, since tumour responses are visible to the naked eye and in most instances recurrences are also localised in the skin
ABC, activated B cell; alloSCT, allogeneic stem cell transplantation; BTK, Bruton’s tyrosine kinase; BV, brentuximab vedotin; C-ALCL, cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma; CD8þ AECTCL, primary cutaneous aggressive epidermotropic CD8þ cytotoxic T cell lymphoma; ChT, chemotherapy; CTCL, cutaneous T cell lymphoma; DLBCL, diffuse large B cell lymphoma; ECP, extracorporeal photopheresis; FDG-PET, ﬂuorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography; HPS, haemophagocytic syndrome; IFNa, interferon alpha; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LPD, lymphoproliferative disorder; LyP, lymphomatoid papulosis; MF, mycosis fungoides; MTX, methotrexate; nb-UVB, narrow-band ultraviolet B; NK, natural killer; PCFCL, primary cutaneous follicle centre lymphoma; PCGD-TCL, primary cutaneous gamma/delta T cell lymphoma; PCL, primary cutaneous lymphoma; PCLBCL-LT, primary cutaneous diffuse large B cell lymphoma, leg type; PCMZL, primary cutaneous marginal zone lymphoma; PTCL-NOS, primary cutaneous peripheral T cell lymphoma-not otherwise speci- ﬁed; PUVA, psoralens plus ultraviolet A; R-CHOP, rituximab/cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincristine/prednisone; RT, radiotherapy; SPTCL, subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphoma;  SS, Se´zary syndrome; TSEBT, total skin electron beam therapy.


 

rituximab as a single drug may achieve remissions. PCLBCL-LT has the phenotype and gene expression profile of ABC-type diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and shows a high frequency of MYD88 and CD79B mutations, which results in constitutive activa- tion of nuclear factor kappa light chain enhancer of activated B cells (NF-jB) signalling [55]. Recent studies suggest that PCLBCL-LT patients may benefit from treatment with Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitors, which block the NF-jB pathway [56].


 
Personalised approaches in the treatment of PCL are still limited. BV is used for the treatment of advanced stage refractory or relapsed CD30þ CTCL, including both patients with C-ALCL and patients with MF/SS, also with the purpose of bridging eligible patients to an alloSCT [28–30, 33]. Mogamulizumab is a human- ised monoclonal antibody targeting the CC chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4), which is overexpressed on the malignant T cells in MF/SS. Mogamulizumab has shown significant clinical efficacy in MF/SS, particularly in patients with blood involvement [34–36]. PCLBCL- LT frequently shows MYD88 and CD79B mutations, resulting in constitutive NF-jB activation [55]. The efficacy of BTK inhibitors that target this pathway is currently under investigation but reports on their efficacy in CBCL are still scarce [56].
 

   Follow-up, long-term implications and   
 
 
Follow-up recommendations should be individualised depend- ing on the clinical situation. The frequency of follow-up visits depends on the type of PCL and the stage of disease. It may vary from every 6 or 12 months in patients with indolent types of PCL and stable disease or patients in complete remission to every 4– 6 weeks in patients with active or progressive disease. Follow-up visits should focus on history and physical examination, and add- itional testing (histology, blood examination, imaging, etc.) should only be carried out if required. Routine imaging after treatment is not required, since tumour responses are visible to the naked eye and in most instances, recurrences are also localised in the skin. Survivorship issues are poorly studied in PCLs and are probably similar to those of patients with more common lym- phomas with the same prognosis treated similarly. A long-term implication specifically found in PCL patients is the increased risk for developing skin cancers, in particular squamous cell car- cinomas, following long-term treatment with PUVA.


 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical
 
Annals of Oncology	Clinical Practice Guidelines
3.	Tan SH, Sim CS, Ong BH. Cutaneous lymphomas other than mycosis fungoides in Singapore: a clinicopathological analysis using recent classi- fication systems. Br J Dermatol 2003; 149: 542–553.
4.	Park JH, Shin HT, Lee DY et al. World Health Organization–European Organization for research and treatment of cancer classification of cuta- neous lymphoma in Korea: a retrospective study at a single tertiary insti- tution. J Am Acad Dermatol 2012; 67: 1200–1209.
5.	Kim YH, Willemze R, Pimpinelli N et al. TNM classification system for primary cutaneous lymphomas other than mycosis fungoides and Se´zary syndrome: a proposal of the International Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas (ISCL) and the Cutaneous Lymphoma Task Force of the European Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC). Blood 2007; 110: 479–484.
6.	Olsen E, Vonderheid E, Pimpinelli N et al. Revisions to the staging and classification of mycosis fungoides and Se´zary syndrome: a proposal of the International Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas (ISCL) and the Cutaneous Lymphoma Task Force of the European Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC). Blood 2007; 110: 1713–1722.
7.	Senff NJ, Kluin-Nelemans HC, Willemze R. Results of bone marrow exam- ination in 275 patients with histological features that suggest an indolent type of cutaneous B-cell lymphoma. Br J Haematol 2008; 142: 52–56.
8.	Agar NS, Wedgeworth E, Crichton S et al. Survival outcomes and prog- nostic factors in mycosis fungoides/Se´zary syndrome: validation of the revised International Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas/European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer staging proposal. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 4730–4739.
9.	Scarisbrick JJ, Prince HM, Vermeer MH et al. Cutaneous Lymphoma International Consortium study of outcome in advanced stages of myco- sis fungoides and Se´zary syndrome: effect of specific prognostic markers on survival and development of a prognostic model. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 3766–3773.
10.	Alberti-Violetti S, Talpur R, Schlichte M et al. Advanced-stage mycosis fungoides and Se´zary syndrome: survival and response to treatment. Clin
 
Practice Guidelines development, http://http://www.esmo.org/
Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The relevant litera- ture has been selected by the expert authors. A summary of rec- ommendations is shown in Table 5. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 6. Statements without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.


 
RW has reported global advisory boards for Takeda and Actelion; EH has reported advisory boards for Takeda and Actelion; PLZ has reported advisory boards for Kirin Kyowa, Takeda, Verastem, Janssen, Roche, Celgene, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Merck; LS has reported advisory boards for Takeda and Merck and research agreements with Takeda and Varian; ML has reported consult- ancy, participation to advisory boards and research support from Abbvie, Acerta, Amgen, Archigen, Celgene, ADC Therapeutics, Gilead, Novartis, Johnson & Johnson, Roche, Roche Diagnostics, Sandoz and Takeda.

 
1.	Willemze R, Jaffe ES, Burg G et al. WHO–EORTC classification for cuta- neous lymphomas. Blood 2005; 105: 3768–3785.
2.	Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL et al. (eds). WHO Classification of Tumours Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, Revised 4th edition. IARC, Lyon 2017.
 
Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk 2015; 15: e105–e112.
11.	Olsen EA, Whittaker S, Kim YH et al. Clinical end points and response criteria  in  mycosis fungoides and  Se´zary  syndrome:  a  consensus  state- ment of the International Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas, the United States Cutaneous Lymphoma Consortium and the Cutaneous Lymphoma Task Force of the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 2598–2607.
12.	Kaye FJ, Bunn PA Jr, Steinberg SM et al. A randomized trial comparing combination electron-beam radiation and chemotherapy with topical therapy in the initial treatment of mycosis fungoides. N Engl J Med 1989; 321: 1784–1790.
13.	Trautinger F, Eder J, Assaf C et al. European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer consensus recommendations for the treatment of  mycosis  fungoides/Se´zary  syndrome  –  update  2017.  Eur  J  Cancer 2017; 77: 57–74.
14.	National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines  in  Oncology;  Mycosis  fungoides/Se´zary  syndrome  (Version 2.2018 – January 2, 2018). https://www.nccn.org/professionals/phys ician_gls/pdf/t-cell.pdf (8 January 2017, date last accessed).
15.	Whittaker S, Hoppe R, Prince HM. How I treat mycosis fungoides and Se´zary syndrome. Blood 2016; 127: 3142–3153.
16.	Lessin SR, Duvic M, Guitart J et al. Topical chemotherapy in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: positive results of a randomized, controlled, multicen- ter trial testing the efficacy and safety of a novel mechlorethamine, 0.02%, gel in mycosis fungoides. JAMA Dermatol 2013; 149: 25–32.
17.	Neelis KJ, Schimmel EC, Vermeer MH et al. Low-dose palliative radio- therapy for cutaneous B- and T-cell lymphomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2009; 74: 154–158.
18.	Specht L, Dabaja B, Illidge T et al. Modern radiation therapy for primary cutaneous lymphomas: field and dose guidelines from the International Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2015; 92: 32–39.
19.	Quaglino P, Maule M, Prince HM et al. Global patterns of care in advanced stage mycosis fungoides/Sezary syndrome: a multicenter
 
Clinical Practice Guidelines	Annals of Oncology
 
retrospective follow-up study from the Cutaneous Lymphoma International Consortium. Ann Oncol 2017; 28: 2517–2525.
20.	Hoppe RT, Harrison C, Tavallaee M et al. Low-dose total skin electron beam therapy as an effective modality to reduce disease burden in patients with mycosis fungoides: results of a pooled analysis from 3 phase-II clinical trials. J Am Acad Dermatol 2015; 72: 286–292.
21.	Kamstrup MR, Gniadecki R, Iversen L et al. Low-dose (10-Gy) total skin electron beam therapy for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: an open clinical study and pooled data analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2015; 92: 138–143.
22.	Marchi E, Alinari L, Tani M et al. Gemcitabine as frontline treatment for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: phase II study of 32 patients. Cancer 2005; 104: 2437–2441.
23.	Dummer R, Quaglino P, Becker JC et al. Prospective international multi- center phase II trial of intravenous pegylated liposomal doxorubicin monochemotherapy in patients with stage IIB, IVA, or IVB advanced mycosis fungoides: final results from EORTC 21012. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30: 4091–4097.
24.	Prince HM, Duvic M, Martin A et al. Phase III placebo-controlled trial of denileukin diftitox for patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 1870–1877.
25.	Olsen EA, Kim YH, Kuzel TM et al. Phase IIb multicenter trial of vorino- stat in patients with persistent, progressive, or treatment refractory cuta- neous T-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 3109–3115.
26.	Whittaker SJ, Demierre MF, Kim EJ et al. Final results from a multicen- ter, international, pivotal study of romidepsin in refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 4485–4491.
27.	Hughes CFM, Khot A, McCormack C et al. Lack of durable disease con- trol with chemotherapy for mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome: a comparative study of systemic therapy. Blood 2015; 125: 71–81.
28.	Duvic M, Tetzlaff MT, Gangar P et al. Results of a phase II trial of bren- tuximab vedotin for CD30þ cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and lympho- matoid papulosis. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 3759–3765.
29.	Kim YH, Tavallaee M, Sundram U et al. Phase II investigator-initiated study of brentuximab vedotin in mycosis fungoides and Se´zary syndrome with variable CD30 expression level: a multi-institution collaborative project. J Clin Oncol 2015; 33: 3750–3758.
30.	Prince HM, Kim YH, Horwitz SM et al. Brentuximab vedotin or physi- cian’s choice in CD30-positive cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (ALCANZA): an international, open-label, randomised, phase 3, multi- centre trial. Lancet 2017; 390: 555–566.
31.	Virmani P, Zain J, Rosen ST et al. Hematopoietic stem cell transplant for my- cosis fungoides and Se´zary syndrome. Dermatol Clin 2015; 33: 807–818.
32.	Duvic M, Donato M, Dabaja B et al. Total skin electron beam and non- myeloablative allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation in advanced mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 2365–2372.
33.	Schneeweiss M, Porpaczy E, Koch M et al. Transformed mycosis fun- goides: bridging to allogeneic stem cell transplantation with brentuximab vedotin. Leuk Lymphoma 2016; 57: 206–208.
34.	Ogura M, Ishida T, Hatake K et al. Multicenter phase II study of moga- mulizumab (KW-0761), a defucosylated anti-cc chemokine receptor 4 antibody, in patients with relapsed peripheral T-cell lymphoma and cuta- neous T-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 1157–1163.
35.	Duvic M, Pinter-Brown LC, Foss FM et al. Phase 1/2 study of mogamuli- zumab, a defucosylated anti-CCR4 antibody, in previously treated patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Blood 2015; 125: 1883–1889.
36.	Kim YH, Bagot M, Pinter-Brown L et al. Anti-CCR4 antibody, mogamu- lizumab, demonstrates significant improvement in PFS compared to vor- inostat in patients with previously treated cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts) 2017; 130: abstr 817.
37.	Russell-Jones R. Extracorporeal photopheresis in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Inconsistent data underline the need for randomized studies. Br J Dermatol 2000; 142: 16–21.
38.	Bernengo MG, Quaglino P, Comessatti A et al. Low-dose intermittent alemtuzumab   in   the   treatment   of   Se´zary   syndrome:   clinical   and immunologic findings in 14 patients. Haematologica 2007; 92: 784–794.
 
39.	Bekkenk MW, Geelen FA, van Voorst Vader PC et al. Primary and sec- ondary cutaneous CD30(þ) lymphoproliferative disorders: a report from the Dutch Cutaneous Lymphoma Group on the long-term follow- up data of 219 patients and guidelines for diagnosis and treatment. Blood 2000; 95: 3653–3661.
40.	Kempf W, Pfaltz K, Vermeer MH et al. EORTC, ISCL, and USCLC con- sensus recommendations for the treatment of primary cutaneous CD30- positive lymphoproliferative disorders: lymphomatoid papulosis and primary cutaneous anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. Blood 2011; 118: 4024–4035.
41.	Bruijn MS, Horva´th B, van Voorst Vader PC et al. Recommendations for treatment of lymphomatoid papulosis with methotrexate: a report from the Dutch Cutaneous Lymphoma Group. Br J Dermatol 2015; 173: 1319–1322.
42.	Melchers RC, Willemze R, Bekkenk MW et al. Evaluation of treatment results in multifocal primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma: report of the Dutch Cutaneous Lymphoma Group. Br J Dermatol 2018 [Epub ahead of print].
43.	Million L, Yi EJ, Wu F et al. Radiation therapy for primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma: an International Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group multi-institutional experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2016; 95: 1454–1459.
44.	Melchers RC, Willemze R, Danie¨ls LA et al. Recommendations for the optimal radiation dose in patients with primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma: a report of the Dutch Cutaneous Lymphoma Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2017; 99: 1279–1285.
45.	Willemze R, Jansen PM, Cerroni L et al. Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T- cell lymphoma: definition, classification and prognostic factors: an EORTC Cutaneous Lymphoma Group study of 83 cases. Blood 2008; 111: 838–845.
46.	Mehta N, Wayne AS, Kim YH et al. Bexarotene is active against subcuta- neous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma in adult and pediatric popula- tions. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk 2012; 12: 20–25.
47.	Ahn HK, Suh C, Chuang SS et al. Extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymph- oma from skin or soft tissue: suggestion of treatment from multinational retrospective analysis. Ann Oncol 2012; 23: 2703–2707.
48.	Wu CC, Takahashi E, Asano N et al. Primary cutaneous NK/T-cell lymphoma of nasal type: an age-related lymphoproliferative disease? Hum Pathol 2017; 68: 61–68.
49.	Chang S, Yoon G, Huh J et al. Comparison of primary and secondary cu- taneous CD56þ NK/T cell lymphomas. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol 2002; 10: 163–170.
50.	Zheng Y, Jia J, Li W et al. Extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, involving the skin, misdiagnosed as nasosinusitis and fungal infec- tion: a case report and literature review. Oncol Lett 2014; 8: 2253–2562.
51.	Liaw T, Hu SC. Nasal-type extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma presenting as a solitary non-healing lower leg ulcer. Australas J Dermatol 2016; 57: e17–e19.
52.	Watabe D, Kanno H, Inoue-Narita T et al. A case of primary cutaneous natural killer/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, with indolent clinical course: monoclonal expansion of Epstein-Barr virus genome correlating with the terminal aggressive behaviour. Br J Dermatol 2009; 160: 205–207.
53.	d’Amore F, Gaulard P, Tru¨mper L et al. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow- up. Ann Oncol 2015; 26(Suppl 5): v108–v115.
54.	Senff NJ, Noordijk EM, Kim YH et al. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer and International Society for Cutaneous Lymphoma consensus recommendations for the manage- ment of cutaneous B-cell lymphomas. Blood 2008; 112: 1600–1609.
55.	Pham-Ledard A, Prochazkova-Carlotti M, Andrique L et al. Multiple genetic alterations in primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma, leg type support a common lymphomagenesis with activated B-cell-like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Mod Pathol 2014; 27: 402–411.
56.	Gupta E, Accurso J, Sluzevich J et al. Excellent outcome of immunomodula- tion or Bruton’s tyrosine kinase inhibition in highly refractory primary cuta- neous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type. Rare Tumors 2015; 7: 6067.
57.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33: 139–144.
