
 
SPECIAL ARTICLE
 
Annals of Oncology 30: 706–720, 2019 doi:10.1093/annonc/mdz056 Published online 21 February 2019
 

 

 

B. Escudier1, C. Porta2,3, M. Schmidinger4, N. Rioux-Leclercq5, A. Bex6,7, V. Khoo8,9, V. Gru¨ nwald10,
S. Gillessen11,12,13 & A. Horwich14, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; 2Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Pavia, Pavia; 3Division of Translational Oncology, IRCCS Istituti Clinici Scientiﬁci Maugeri, Pavia, Italy; 4Department of Medicine I, Clinical Division of Oncology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 5Department of Pathology, Rennes Hospital and University, Rennes, France; 6UCL Division of Surgery and Interventional Science, Royal Free Hospital, Specialist Center for Kidney Cancer, London, UK; 7Division of Surgical Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 8Department of Clinical Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK; 9Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne and Monash University, Victoria, Australia; 10Internal Medicine (Tumour Research) and Clinic for Urology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany; 11Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester; 12The Christie, Manchester, UK; 13Division of Oncology and Haematology, Kantonsspital St. Gallen, Switzerland; 14Department of Academic Radiotherapy, Institute of Cancer Research, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton Hospital, Sutton, UK

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland; E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: September 2008, last update January 2019. This publication supersedes the previously published version—Ann Oncol 2016; 27 (Suppl 5): v58–v68.


 

 
 
Kidney cancer accounts for 5% and 3% of all adult malignancies in men and women, respectively, thus representing the 7th most com- mon cancer in men, and the 10th most common cancer in women [1]. However, available statistics include not only renal parenchy- mal tumours, but also urothelial cancer of the renal pelvis; renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for 80% of all kidney cancers.
After over two decades of increasing rates, RCC incidence trends worldwide have shown signs of plateauing in recent years. Furthermore, kidney cancer mortality rates overall have levelled. These patterns are consistent with reports of incidental diagnosis and downward shift of tumour stage and size; indeed, the wide- spread use of non-invasive radiological techniques [e.g. ultrason- ography (US), computed tomography (CT)], allows the frequent detection of early and small RCCs, which are potentially curable.
Beyond well-known risk factors for RCC, such as cigarette smoking, obesity and hypertension, evidence is accumulating to suggest an aetiological or, on the contrary, a protective role, for additional factors [2], such as trichloroethylene. In a recently published case–control study of 699 RCC patients and 1001 frequency-matched controls, consumption of caffeinated coffee was found to be associated with reduced risk of RCC; interesting- ly, decaffeinated coffee was associated with an increased risk for aggressive clear cell RCC (ccRCC) [3].
Furthermore, RCC also appears to be more common in patients with end-stage renal failure or acquired renal cystic
 
disease, and in patients on dialysis, those who have had kidney transplantation or those with tuberous sclerosis syndrome.
Approximately 2%–3% of all RCCs are hereditary and several autosomal dominant syndromes are described, each with a distinct genetic basis and phenotype, the most common one being von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) disease. Patients with multiple and bilateral lesions and/or other related disorders should be tested for these germline mutations since it is important that they are recognised.


As stated above, >50% of RCCs are currently detected incidental- ly, making the classical triad of flank pain, gross haematuria and palpable abdominal mass less frequent than in the past. Despite
this, RCC remains the ‘Internist’s cancer’ with paraneoplastic syndromes such as hypercalcaemia, unexplained fever, erythrocy- tosis and Stauffer’s syndrome (signs of cholestasis unrelated to tumour infiltration of the liver or intrinsic liver disease, which typically resolve after kidney tumour resection) still being rela- tively frequent.
Suspicion of RCC should prompt laboratory examinations of serum creatinine, haemoglobin, leukocyte and platelet counts, lymphocyte to neutrophil ratio, lactate dehydrogenase, C-react- ive protein (CRP) and serum-corrected calcium [IV, B]. Some of these tests are prognostic for survival and are used for risk
 

VC   The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
 
assessment within different prognostic score systems (see Staging and risk assessment section).
Most cases of RCC are strongly suspected by imaging. Diagnosis is usually suggested by US and further investigated by CT scan, which allows for assessment of local invasiveness, even- tual lymph node involvement or distant metastases. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may provide additional information in investigating local advancement and venous involvement by tu- mour thrombus.
For accurate staging of RCC, contrast-enhanced chest, abdom- inal and pelvic CT is mandatory [III, A]; unless indicated by clin- ical or laboratory signs or symptoms, the use of bone scan or brain CT (or MRI) is not recommended for routine clinical prac- tice [III, A]. In case of an allergy to CT contrast agent or renal in- sufficiency, adequate staging should include a high-resolution CT scan of the chest without contrast agent, together with an ab- dominal MRI. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomog- raphy (FDG-PET) is not a standard investigation in the diagnosis and staging of ccRCC and should not be used. The role of new tracers is under investigation.
A renal tumour core biopsy provides histopathological con- firmation of malignancy with high sensitivity and specificity; it is especially recommended before treatment with ablative therapies [III, B] as well as in patients with metastatic disease before start- ing systemic treatment [III, B]. Complications (e.g. bleeding or tumour seeding) are rare or even exceptional (as in the case of tu- mour seeding) [4], while diagnostic accuracy remains high [5]. The final histopathological diagnosis, classification, grading and evaluation of prognostic factors are based on the nephrectomy specimen when available.

Pathology assessment
The last edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) histological classification of renal tumours has been reported in 2016 (Table 1), and was based on tumour histology, chromosomal alterations and molecular pathways [6].
ccRCCs represent 80% of malignant renal tumours in adults, with the remaining 20% corresponding to several histological subtypes with different histological, molecular and cytogenetic profiles [7]. Papillary and chromophobe RCCs account for 80% of non-ccRCCs.
Papillary RCCs which represent a heterogeneous disease are characterised by:
•	type 1 RCCs more frequently associated to MET or epider- mal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations and
•	type 2 RCCs often unique tumours with an aggressive phenotype that are associated with SETD2 mutations, CDKN2A mutations or TFE3 fusions [8].
In papillary type 2 with familial history of papillary RCC, a fu- marate hydratase (FH) mutation should also be investigated.
The main goal in diagnosis of chromophobe RCC, especially in the eosinophilic histological subtype, is the differential diagnosis with oncocytoma. Chromophobe RCCs have diffuse positivity for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), whereas oncocytomas are negative or present focal positivity for CK7. Moreover, chromophobe RCCs display more frequent chromosome loss but fewer somatic muta- tions. The most frequently mutated gene is tumour suppressor
 

 


protein 53 (TP53) (32%), and the most frequent oncogenic path- ways involved in such tumours are mammalian target of rapamy- cin (mTOR) pathways (23%), including alterations of phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) [9].
Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MiT) family translocation RCCs (tRCCs) must be ruled out in young patients under the age of 40 years, if papillary architecture or complex architecture with clear cells and/or epithelioid cells or psam- moma bodies are present. The diagnosis is based on the use of both immunohistochemistry and fluorescent in situ hybridisa- tion (FISH) analysis to demonstrate the presence of TFE3/TFEB rearrangement. Recently, Argani et al. reported cases of TFEB- amplified RCCs that occur in older patients. These tumours pre- sented high-grade eosinophilic cells with necrosis and papillary or pseudopapillary architecture. The expression of melanocytic markers is variable and FISH analyses revealed high levels of TFEB gene amplification. The prognosis of such tumours is poor with usually advanced stage and metastatic outcome [10].
Collecting duct carcinoma (CDC) or Bellini duct carcinoma remains a highly aggressive RCC arising from the renal collecting tubules. A recent specific gene expression signature showed that CDC appears to be a unique entity among kidney cancers [11]. Moreover, these tumours are characterised by an immune profile with an average of 22% of tumour-infiltrating lympho- cytes [12].
The prognostic factors validated by the International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) consensus and the WHO 2016 clas- sification of RCC to be reported in routine practice are [13]:
•	the tumour histological subtype;
•	the ISUP nucleolar grade (instead of the previous Fuhrman grade) that is only applicable to ccRCC and papillary RCC;
•	a sarcomatoid and/or rhabdoid differentiation that deﬁnes a grade 4 tumour;
 
•	the presence of necrosis;
•	the presence of microscopic vascular invasion;
•	the pathological tumour, node and metastasis (pTNM) staging and
•	description of the non-neoplastic renal tissue.

Biology
Beyond the classical one gene–one histology paradigm, a more complex biological classification of RCC (and especially of its clear cell histotype) is emerging [14].
First, RCC proved to be an extremely heterogeneous disease [15]; beyond the seminal genetic alteration (mutation, deletion or hypermethylation) of the VHL tumour suppressor gene, which is present in the vast majority of sporadic RCCs, other genetic alterations may occur, especially over time [16], contributing to worsen the prognosis of patients harbouring these tumours. Notably, three of these other genes (PBRM1, BAP1 and SETD2) are located on the same short arm of chromosome 3 where the VHL gene is also located.
On the contrary, some RCCs are characterised by mutations in the mTOR pathway, and especially in the highly conserved FAT (FRAP, ATM, TTRAP) and kinase domains of the MTOR gene; these cancers have been defined as metabolic RCCs [17].
Finally, according to another comprehensive molecular char- acterisation of papillary RCCs, type 1 and type 2 papillary RCCs were shown to be clinically and biologically distinct. Alterations in the MET pathway were indeed associated with type 1 and acti- vation of the NRF2-ARE pathway was associated with type 2, while CDKN2A loss and a CpG island methylator phenotype in type 2 contributed to convey a poor prognosis [8].



Staging

The Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) tumour, node and metastasis (TNM) 8 staging system should be used [18] (Table 2).

 
Risk assessment
The natural clinical course varies in RCC, which has led to the de- velopment of different prognostic models for the assessment of the patient’s individual risk. Extent of disease, histology, grading and clinical factors have been recognised as having prognostic value in RCC and may be used in localised or in metastatic disease [6].

Localised disease. Different pre- or post-operative scores have been developed to assess prognosis in RCC, and are used for risk- adapted follow-up strategies. Integrated prognostic scores offer some predictive advantages over single tumour characteristics and are used preferentially. These models are composed of histo- logical and clinical factors. The most recent modifications of the stage, size, grade and necrosis (SSIGN) score [19] (Table 3) and the University of California Los Angeles Integrated Staging System (UISS) (Table 4) [20] score are frequently used.
However, among different prognostic scores, a concordance of 0.68–0.89 for cancer-specific survival (CSS) and 0.74–0.82 for
 



recurrence-free survival (RFS) was reported [21], indicating that a plateau has been reached for prognostication with available models. Hence, no clear preference for a specific prognostic model may be given.

Advanced disease. The Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) system was the gold standard for the risk assessment during cytokine treatment in metastatic RCC (mRCC) [22], and it is still commonly used. Further refinement was introduced with the International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium (IMDC) score, which extended the previous factors to a total number of six in order to increase concordance [23]:
•	Karnofsky performance status (PS) <80%;
•	haemoglobin level below the lower limit of normal;
•	time from diagnosis to treatment <1 year;
 
•	corrected calcium above the upper limit of normal;
•	platelets greater than the upper limit of normal and
•	neutrophils greater than the upper limit of normal.
A recent evaluation of this model in second-line treatment underscored its predictive value in previously treated mRCC [24] (Table 5). Interestingly, this model is also applicable in further lines of therapy as well as in non-clear cell histology.


Molecular prognostication and biomarkers. Gene signatures can be used to detect different risk groups in RCC. ClearCode34 is a 34-gene expression panel that proved able to classify ccRCC into two subtypes, clear cell A (ccA) and clear cell B (ccB), significantly associated with relapse-free survival and CSS, as well as overall survival (OS) [25]. Another gene signature, based on a 16-gene assay, was shown to improve prediction of RFS in localised RCC when compared with the SSIGN score according to the Leibovich score (concordance: 0.81 versus 0.74) [26].
Some gene mutations have also been reported as prognostic. The University of Texas Southwestern group identified distinct clinical outcomes in mutation-defined subtypes of ccRCC: a high- risk BAP1-mutant group and a favourable PBRM1-mutant group [27]. Notably, 80% of patients from both the development and the validation cohorts had localised (or locoregional) disease.
In the metastatic setting, the immunohistochemical expression of programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is presently under the spot- light, although the results available so far are still controversial. In 2016, a systematic review and meta-analysis of 6 studies and 1323 cases clearly demonstrated a negative prognostic role of elevated level of PD-L1 tumour expression in RCC [28], although discrep- ancies between PD-L1 expression between the primary tumour and


Table 4. UISS risk groups and 5-year disease-speciﬁc survival [20]

Patient group	Prognostic group
		T stage	Fuhrman grade	ECOG status	5-year disease-specific
					survival (%)
Localised disease (N0, M0)	Low risk	1	1–2	0	91.1
	Intermediate risk	1	1–2	1 or more	80.4
		1	3–4	Any	
		2	Any	Any	
		3	1	Any	
		3	2–4	Any	
	High	3	2–4	1 or more	54.7
		4	Any	Any	
Metastatic disease	Low risk

Intermediate risk	N1M0 N2M0/M1 N2M0/M1	Any 1–2
1–2	Any 0
1 or more	32

19.5
			3	0, 1 or more	
			4	0	
	High	N2M0/M1	4	1 or more	0
ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; UISS, University of California Los Angeles Integrated Staging System. Reprinted from [20] with permission. VC   2004 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 

 

the metastases have been reported. A possible predictive value of PD-L1 expression remains controversial, although recently, PD-L1 tumour expression was shown to be able to identify patients bene- fiting from a combination of two immune-checkpoint inhibitors [29]. In addition, angiogenesis, T-effector/interferon (IFN)-c re- sponse and myeloid inflammatory gene expression signatures have been suggested to predict response to vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) and im- munotherapy [30]. As a whole, PD-L1 expression should not be routinely used but is a putative biomarker for future treatment se- lection because of remaining unanswered issues related to the dif- ferent tests and cut-offs used, to the cells where PD-L1 expression should be checked and to the role of PD-L1 expression heterogen- eity (e.g. between different primary tumour sites, or between pri- mary tumour and its metastases).
Other putative markers such as circulating DNA, microRNA or DNA methylation status were shown to have prognostic rele- vance in RCC and warrant future investigation. Overall, these data indicate that molecular analysis may provide additional benefit to already established clinical and histo-anatomical parameters, which may lead to an individual risk assessment in the future. Currently, no specific molecular marker can be rec- ommended for clinical use.


 
Role of surgery and local therapy

T1 tumours (<7 cm). Partial nephrectomy (PN) is recommended as the preferred option in organ-confined tumours measuring up to 7 cm (elective indication). This is based on a systematic review
including multiple retrospective studies and a prospective, rand- omised controlled trial (RCT) which compared radical nephrec- tomy (RN) with PN in solitary T1a-b N0M0 renal tumours
<5 cm with normal contralateral kidney function [I, A] [31].
PN can be carried out via open, laparoscopic or robot-assisted
laparoscopic approaches. Laparoscopic RN is recommended if PN is not technically feasible. In patients with compromised renal func- tion, solitary kidney or bilateral tumours, PN is also the standard of care, with no tumour size limitation (imperative indication).
Systematic reviews comparing surgical management of local- ised RCC (T1-2N0M0) were unable to identify prospective
 
comparative studies reporting on oncological outcomes for min- imally invasive ablative procedures compared with PN [31].
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA), microwave ablation (MWA) or cryoablation (CA) treatments are options in patients with small cortical tumours (≤3 cm), especially for patients who are frail, present a high surgical risk and those with a solitary kidney, compromised renal function, hereditary RCC or multiple bilat- eral tumours. Renal biopsy is recommended to confirm malig- nancy and subtype in this setting.
Systematic reviews of RFA and PN suggest a long-term CSS for RFA, equal to PN with a low metastasis rate but slightly higher local recurrence rate compared with PN and CA [31]. The quality of the available evidence prevents definitive conclusions regard- ing morbidity and oncological outcomes for RFA and CA [III].
Active surveillance is an option in elderly patients with signifi- cant comorbidities or those with a short life expectancy and solid renal tumours measuring <40 mm. The growth of renal tumours (mean 3 mm/year) is low in most cases and progression to meta- static disease is reported in 1%–2% [32]. Renal biopsy is recom-
mended to select patients with small masses for active surveillance [III] with high accuracy, especially because of the in- cidence of non-malignant tumours in this setting [4, 5].

T2 tumours (>7 cm). Laparoscopic RN is the preferred option.

Locally advanced RCC (T3 and T4). Open RN remains the stand- ard of care, even though a laparoscopic approach can be considered.
Systematic adrenalectomy or extensive lymph node dissection is not recommended when abdominal CT shows no evidence of adrenal or lymph node invasion.
The evidence regarding management of venous tumour thrombus is based on retrospective studies with significant risks of bias and confounding. Resection of venous thrombi is chal- lenging and associated with a high risk of complications. Surgical intervention should be considered, but the most effective ap- proach remains unknown and outcome depends on tumour thrombus level [III].

Adjuvant therapy
Several RCTs of adjuvant sunitinib (S-TRAC, ASSURE), sorafenib (ASSURE) and pazopanib (PROTECT) have been reported [33– 35]. Only S-TRAC was positive for its primary end point, disease- free survival (DFS) by independent review, but without any OS benefit. This result led to approval of sunitinib by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The European Medicines Agency (EMA) has not approved adjuvant therapy with any of these drugs because of the imbalance between risk and clinical benefit. A recent pooled analysis of S-TRAC, ASSURE and PROTECT did not reveal a statistically significant effect between adjuvant VEGFR-targeted therapy and an improved DFS or OS in patients with intermediate-/high-risk local or regional fully resected RCC [36]. Improvement in DFS may be more likely with the use of full-dose regimens and in high-risk disease, but adjuvant treatment was associated with high-grade adverse events (AEs).
Neoadjuvant approaches are experimental and should not be proposed outside of clinical trials. Attempting to downsize
 
venous tumour thrombi with systemic targeted therapy cannot be recommended.


Role of surgery and local therapy

In the cytokine era, cytoreductive nephrectomy (CN) was recom- mended in patients with good PS [I, A] [37]. Two randomised trials (CARMENA and SURTIME) investigated the role and se- quence of CN in the era of VEGFR-targeted therapy [38, 39]. While SURTIME was underpowered, CARMENA demonstrated that upfront CN should no longer be considered the standard of care in MSKCC intermediate- and poor-risk patients with asymptomatic primary tumours when medical treatment is required [I, A]. Upfront CN is associated with morbidity and mortality, and there is no subgroup in these studies in which this approach proved to be superior. Secondary CN in patients with local symptoms due to the primary tumour or near complete responses to systemic therapy remains an option.
Results of CARMENA and SURTIME should not be used to abandon CN in patients with low volume metastatic disease, a good PS and favourable and intermediate risk, who are candi- dates for initial observation. In fact, both trials recruited patients with high median metastatic volumes (42% of total tumour bur- den for CARMENA) who needed to start sunitinib.
Metastasectomy and other local treatment strategies including whole-brain radiotherapy (WBRT), conventional radiotherapy (RT), stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS), stereotactic body
 
radiotherapy (SBRT), CyberKnifeVR      RT and hypofractionated RT can be considered and carried out for selected patients after multi- disciplinary review. A systematic review of 16 studies including 2350 patients sought to identify the evidence base for local treat- ment strategies of metastases from RCC [40]. The results consist- ently point towards a benefit of complete metastasectomy for OS and CSS, but there is selection bias and the results have to be inter- preted with caution. No systemic treatment is recommended after metastasectomy.
No general guidelines can be given to identify cases to refer for local treatment of metastases. Patient selection should be dis- cussed in a multidisciplinary team. Good PS, solitary or oligome- tastases,   metachronous   disease   with   disease-free   interval
>2 years, the absence of progression on systemic therapy, low or intermediate Fuhrman grade and complete resection have been
associated with favourable outcome after local treatment of meta- stases from RCC.

Systemic treatment for ccRCC
Recommendations mainly relate to clear cell histology, since most of the pivotal trials have been conducted in this common histological subtype. In addition, recommendations will differ according to risk stratification (see above).
The proper time to start systemic therapy is not well defined. Because of the indolent course of some RCCs, a period of obser- vation before starting treatment should be considered, especially in patients with limited tumour burden and few symptoms. Indeed, the outcome of patients who crossed over to an active agent after a brief period of treatment with placebo, within
 


ccRCC




Good risk	Intermediate risk	Poor risk




 
Standard: Sunitinib [I, A] Pazopanib [I, A]
Bevacizumab + IFN [I, A] Tivozanib [II, A; MCBS 1]a
Option:
High-dose IL2 [III, B] Bevacizumab + low-dose IFN [III, B]
 

Standard:
Nivolumab + ipilimumab [I, A; MCBS 3]a
Option:
Cabozantinib [II, A; MCBS 3]a Sunitinib [I, B] Pazopanib, [I, B]
Tivozanib [II, B; MCBS 1]a Bevacizumab + IFN [II, C]
 

Standard:
Nivolumab + ipilimumab [I, A; MCBS 3]a
Option:
Cabozantinib [II, B; MCBS 3]a Sunitinib [II, C] Pazopanib, [II, C] Temsirolimus [I, C]
 

Figure 1. Systemic ﬁrst-line treatment of ccRCC.
aESMO-MCBS scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA since 1 January 2016. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee.
ccRCC, clear cell renal cell carcinoma; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESMO-MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; IFN, inter- feron; IL2, interleukin 2; MCBS, Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale.
 
placebo-controlled phase III trials, indirectly supports this option [II, C]. The safety of observation has been suggested by retro- spective studies and confirmed by a prospective study [41].


First-line treatment. An algorithm for first-line systemic treat- ment in ccRCC is presented in Figure 1. Three vascular endothe- lial growth factor (VEGF)-targeted agents have demonstrated efficacy in pivotal phase III trials, mostly focused on good and intermediate patients: bevacizumab (combined with IFN), suni- tinib and pazopanib [42–44]. All three drugs have been registered based on improvement of progression-free survival (PFS) over ei- ther IFN or placebo. Furthermore, pazopanib has been shown not to be inferior to sunitinib in a large phase III trial [45]. Efficacy of both sunitinib and pazopanib has been confirmed by real-world evidence studies, and these two TKIs are currently the most commonly used treatments in good- and intermediate-risk patients. In addition, tivozanib, a selective VEGF inhibitor, has been shown to improve PFS and response rate versus sorafenib, especially in good-risk patients [46], and is EMA-approved for first-line treatment.
Temsirolimus has been tested in a phase III study in poor-risk patients only, versus IFN, demonstrating evidence of improved OS in this patient population [47].
Recently, a large phase III study demonstrated that the com- bination of nivolumab and ipilimumab was superior to sunitinib in intermediate- and poor-risk patients, but not in good-risk patients [29]. In the intermediate- and poor-risk population, the combination improved OS as well as response rate, with a high complete response rate (9.4%). In contrast, both response rates and PFS were higher with sunitinib in the good-risk group.
In addition to these large phase III trials, some efficacy has been reported with sorafenib, high-dose interleukin-2 (IL2) and low-
 
dose IFN combined with bevacizumab, and such therapies should be considered as possible options when the standard treatments are not available. Similarly, single-agent IFN-a, as the inferior arm of three RCTs, should no longer be regarded as a standard option.
Finally, based on a randomised phase II study, cabozantinib appeared to be superior to sunitinib in terms of PFS and response rate and has been approved by the EMA in the first-line setting in intermediate- and poor-risk patients [48].
Based on the recent data, it appears useful to provide recom- mendations based on risk classification [see level of evidence (LoE) in Figure 1].
In good-risk patients, VEGF-targeted agents should remain the standard of care with sunitinib, pazopanib or bevacizumab combined with IFN. Tivozanib is another standard of care when available.
In intermediate-risk patients, combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab is the new standard of care. If this combination is not available, VEGF-targeted agents should be recommended as in good-risk patients, with cabozantinib being another option in this patient population.
In poor-risk patients, similarly, combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab is the new standard of care. Among targeted agents, cabozantinib is an attractive option when available. In this specific patient population, temsirolimus remains an option, as well as TKIs (sunitinib or pazopanib). However, in some poor- risk patients with poor Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) PS, only palliative care should be recommended.


Second-line treatment. An algorithm for second-line systemic treatment in ccRCC is presented in Figure 2.
Evidence that TKIs are active after cytokines has been seen with sorafenib, pazopanib, axitinib and tivozanib. Sunitinib also has activity is this setting. Any of these agents can be used after
 


ccRCC




TKI	Nivolumab + ipilimumab




 

Standard: Nivolumab [I, A; MCBS 5]a Cabozantinib [I, A; MCBS 3]a
Option:
Axitinib [II, B] Everolimus [II, B]
Lenvatinib + everolimus [II, B; MCBS 4]a
 



Option:
Any TKI [IV, C]
Lenvatinib + everolimus [IV, C; MCBS 4]a
 


Figure 2. Second-line treatment of ccRCC.
aESMO-MCBS scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA since 1 January 2016. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee.
ccRCC, clear cell renal cell carcinoma; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESMO-MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; MCBS, Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
 
cytokines. However, since VEGF-targeted therapy is now the first-line standard of care, the number of patients treated with cytokines is decreasing.
After first-line treatment with VEGF-targeted therapy:
•	both axitinib and everolimus are active [49, 50]. Both drugs have shown signiﬁcant improved PFS over sorafenib (axiti- nib) or placebo (everolimus) and
•	based on recent phase III trials, sorafenib can also be used as an option.
However, second-line treatment has been dramatically modi- fied by the report of two large trials showing improvement in OS with nivolumab and cabozantinib [51–53] over everolimus. Both trials showed very significant improvement in OS and re- sponse rate, while PFS was improved only in the cabozantinib trial. In both trials, patients could be treated after either one or two TKIs.
Obviously, availability of these two drugs is still heterogenous, and several situations should be differentiated:
•	if only nivolumab is available, it should be recommended;
•	if both nivolumab and cabozantinib are available, either drug is recommended;
•	the combination of lenvatinib and everolimus showed PFS and OS beneﬁt over everolimus based on a randomised study of 150 patients [54] and is FDA and EMA-approved. However, based on the size of this study, this combination should be considered as an acceptable option, primarily when nivolumab or cabozantinib cannot be delivered;
•	if none of these drugs is available, either everolimus or axi- tinib can be used.
The optimal duration of treatment, especially for nivolumab, remains unclear, as well as the benefit of treatment beyond progression.

Third-line treatment. An algorithm for third-line systemic treatment in ccRCC is presented in Figure 3. Beyond second-
 
line treatment, enrolment into clinical trials is recommended whenever possible. However, based on recent trials with nivo- lumab and cabozantinib, different situations should be defined:
•	In patients already treated with two TKIs, either nivolumab or cabozantinib is recommended. If neither of these drugs is available, everolimus remains an acceptable option.
•	In patients previously treated with one TKI and nivolumab, cabozantinib is recommended, if available. In the absence of cabozantinib, either everolimus or axitinib can be used.
•	In patients previously treated with one TKI and cabozanti- nib, nivolumab is recommended, and either everolimus or axitinib remain acceptable options.
•	In patients previously treated with VEGF-targeted therapy and an mTOR inhibitor, sorafenib has shown activity [55]. However, nivolumab or cabozantinib can be recommended in this setting. Finally, another TKI or re-challenge with the same TKI is considered as an option.

Medical treatment for non-ccRCC
Clinical data are limited in these rare histological subtypes, which are usually excluded from controlled phase III trials. Therefore, enrolment into specific clinical trials is strongly recommended. The current evidence is mainly based on small prospective studies and subgroup analyses from larger trials, which mainly focus on TKI or mTOR inhibitor testing [56, 57]. Although not providing definitive answers, these trials favoured sunitinib over the use of everolimus, indicating a similar pattern as that seen in ccRCC. These results were further supported by data from expanded ac- cess programmes, retrospective series and from subgroup ana- lysis of the temsirolimus registration trial. Overall, the most robust data exist for the use of sunitinib. These studies also sug- gest that patients with non-clear cell histology may benefit from treatment with everolimus, sorafenib, pazopanib or temsiroli- mus. However, in most of these studies, only patients with papil- lary and chromophobe tumours were enrolled. More recently,
 

 
Figure 3. Third-line treatment of ccRCC.
aESMO-MCBS scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA since 1 January 2016. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee.
ccRCC, clear cell renal cell carcinoma; EMA, European Medicine Agency; ESMO-MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; MCBS, Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
 

 
Figure 4. Systemic ﬁrst-line treatment of non-ccRCC. Non-ccRCC, non-clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

 
clinical data on checkpoint inhibitors have been reported, which suggest clinical activity in patients with non-ccRCC and support their use in such previously treated patients. An algorithm for first-line systemic treatment in non-ccRCC is presented in Figure 4.
After first-line therapy, there is no recommendation possible based on available data. However, at least for papillary tumours, which are the most common non-ccRCCs, the use of the ccRCC algorithm is an acceptable option.
In addition to these general recommendations, some specific situations should be considered:
•	cMET inhibitors have shown activity in papillary RCC with cMET mutation or ampliﬁcation [58]. Crizotinib or other cMET inhibitors such as cabozantinib appear as an acceptable option instead of the usual VEGF TKIs.
•	Some patients with chromophobe RCC may beneﬁt from mTOR inhibitors since mutation on chromosome 7 was shown to lead to a loss of the folliculin gene with upregula- tion of mTOR [9].
•	Some data suggest that sarcomatoid tumours are very inﬂamed tumours, usually with poor-risk features, and are sensitive to immune checkpoint inhibitors. Thus, the use of nivolumab/ipilimumab combination should be consid- ered as a good option for these patients.
•	Finally, CDCs (and also medullary carcinomas) were reported to behave more like aggressive urothelial tumours rather than RCCs and may therefore be considered for chemotherapy, although expected results are still poor.
•	None of these ‘genetic’ recommendations can be graded, as data are limited and no clear treatment recommendation can be made for these subgroups with distinct biology.

Role of radiotherapy and bisphosphonates
Although radiosensitivity of RCC is not perfect, this is not a radioresistant disease. RT has been shown to provide good symp- tom palliation and local control in RCC depending on the dose that can be delivered [59]. There is a developing rationale with emerging data suggesting that the apparent radioresistance of RCC can be overcome through the ceramide pathway with the
 
use of higher dose-per-fraction treatments usually delivered by new high-precision RT methods such as SBRT [IV, B] [60]. This can be exploited and used in many different clinical situations, particularly for unresectable local recurrences or oligometastatic disease.
There is no current evidence for the use of RT in the neoadju- vant or adjuvant setting. This is on the basis of four negative ‘old’ trials with two pre-operative and two adjuvant studies. Despite being randomised trials, there are several major limitations in trial design and methodology that included inappropriate case se- lection, sub-therapeutic RT regimes and inadequate patient numbers. Furthermore, treatment morbidity was substantially increased and the RT techniques used then have now been super- seded by improved modern irradiation methods such as intensity-modulated RT (IMRT) or SBRT [II, D].
RT can be used to treat unresectable local or recurrent disease with the aim of improving local control. For patients in whom surgery cannot be carried out due to poor PS or unsuitable clinic- al condition, RT can be an alternative if other local therapies such as RFA are not appropriate. Modern image-guided RT techni- ques are needed to enable a high biological dose to be delivered, such as volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT) or SBRT [IV, B]. As discussed earlier, there is an emerging role for its use in the synchronous or metachronous development of oligometastatic mRCC disease, oligoprogression or in mixed response scenarios with immunotherapy or targeted therapies, although none of these techniques can be graded [IV, B].
RT is an effective treatment for palliation of local and symp- tomatic mRCC disease or to prevent the progression of metastatic disease in critical sites such as the bones or brain [I, A]. For symp- tomatic bone metastasis, local RT (either as a single fraction or fractionated course) can provide good symptom relief in up to two-thirds of cases with complete symptomatic responses in up to 20%–25% [I, A].
For the management of spinal cord compression, an ambula- tory status at diagnosis and limited metastatic disease are favour- able prognostic factors in those patients able to undergo surgery. The use of initial surgery and postoperative RT was reported in a randomised trial to improve survival and maintenance of ambu- lation compared with irradiation alone [I, A] [61].
 
Table 6. Summary of recommendations

Diagnosis and pathology/molecular biology
•	Laboratory examinations of serum creatinine, haemoglobin, leukocyte and platelet counts, lymphocyte to neutrophil ratio, lactate dehydrogenase, CRP and serum-corrected calcium tests should be carried out to conﬁrm suspicion of RCC [IV, B]
•	For accurate staging, US and contrast-enhanced chest, abdominal and pelvic CT are recommended [III, A]
•	A renal tumour core biopsy is recommended before treatment with ablative therapies and in patients with metastatic disease before starting systemic treatment [III, B]
•	Pathology should be assessed using the 2016 WHO histological classiﬁcation of renal tumours and ISUP grading
Staging and risk assessment
•	The UICC TNM 8 staging system should be used
Management of local/locoregional disease
•	For organ-conﬁned T1 tumours <7 cm, PN is recommended [I, A]. Laparoscopic RN is recommended if PN is not feasible [I, A]
•	In patients with compromised renal function, solitary or bilateral tumours, PN is also recommended with no tumour size limitation
•	RFA, MWA or CA are options in patients with small cortical tumours ≤3 cm, frail patients, high surgical risk, solitary kidney, compromised renal function and hereditary RCC or bilateral tumours [III]
•	Renal biopsy is recommended to conﬁrm malignancy and subtype for these patients
•	Active surveillance for elderly patients with signiﬁcant comorbidities or those with short life expectancy and solid renal tumours <40 mm; renal biopsy is recommended to select these patients [III]
•	For T2 tumours >7 cm laparoscopic RN is preferred option
•	For T3 and T4 tumours (locally advanced), open RN is the standard of care, although a laparoscopic approach can be considered
Management of advanced/metastatic disease
•	CN is recommended in patients with good PS [I, A] except in intermediate- and poor-risk patients with asymptomatic primary tumours when medical treatment is required [I, A]
•	RT can be used to treat unresectable local or recurrent disease and in patients unsuitable for surgery due to poor PS or unsuitable clinical condition. RT is
an alternative if radioablation is not appropriate
•	Image-guided RT techniques such as VMAT or SBRT are needed to enable a high dose to be delivered [IV, B]
•	RT is an effective treatment for palliation of local and symptomatic mRCC disease or to prevent the progression of metastatic disease in critical sites such as bones or brain [I, A]
•	For mRCC patients with brain metastases, the use of corticosteroids can provide temporary relief of cerebral symptoms. WBRT between 20 and 30 Gy in
4–10 fractions is recommended for effective symptom control [II, B]
•	For good-prognosis mRCC patients with a single unresectable brain metastasis, SRS with or without WBRT should be considered [II, A]
•	For ﬁrst-line systemic treatment, VEGF-targeted agents and TKIs are recommended options for good- and intermediate-risk patients. Tivozanib is EMA- approved for good-risk patients [II, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1]
•	The combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab is recommended for intermediate- and poor-risk patients [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3] but not for the
good-risk group
•	Cabozantinib is EMA-approved for intermediate- [II, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3] and poor-risk groups [II, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3]
•	For second-line treatment, following TKIs, nivolumab [l, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 5] or cabozantinib [l, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3] is recommended
•	The combination of lenvatinib and everolimus following TKIs is FDA- and EMA-approved [II, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4] and is recommended after the nivolumab/ipilimumab combination [IV, C; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3]
•	If none of these drugs is available, either everolimus or axitinib can be used
•	In patients already treated with two TKIs, either nivolumab [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 5] or cabozantinib is recommended
Follow-up, long-term implications and survivorship
•	Follow-up for high-risk patients includes CT scans of thorax and abdomen every 3–6 months for the ﬁrst 2 years; an annual CT scan is recommended for low-risk patients
•	For mRCC patients during systemic therapy, 2- to 4-month follow-up with CT scan is advised
•	RECIST is the most frequent used method to assess drug efﬁcacy

CA, cryoablation; CN, cytoreductive nephrectomy; CRP, C-reactive protein; CT, computed tomography; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESMO-MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; ISUP, International Society of Urological Pathology; mRCC, metastatic renal cell carcinoma; MWA, microwave ablation; PN, partial nephrectomy; PS, performance status; RCC, renal cell carcinoma; RECIST, Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; RN, radical nephrectomy; RT, radiotherapy; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; SRS, stereotactic radiosur- gery; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor; TNM, tumour, node and metastasis; UICC, Union for International Cancer Control; US, ultrasound; VEGF, vascular endothe- lial growth factor; VMAT, volumetric-modulated arc therapy; WBRT, whole-brain radiotherapy; WHO, World Health Organization.
 
Table 7. ESMO-MCBS table for new therapies/indications in renal cell carcinomaa
Therapy	Disease setting	Trial	Control	Absolute survival gain
 


HR (95% CI)	QoL/Toxicity	ESMO-MCBS scoreb
 

Nivolumab, a PD-1 checkpoint inhibitor
 

Advanced clear cell renal cell carcinoma previously treated with one or two regimens of antiangiogenic therapy
 

Study of nivolumab versus evero- limus in pre-treated advanced or metastatic clear-cell renal cell carcinoma
(CheckMate 025) [51] Phase III NCT01668784
 

Everolimus Median OS:
19.6 months
 

OS gain:
5.4 months
 

OS HR: 0.73
(0.57–0.93)
 

Improved toxicity proﬁle and QoL
 

5 (Form 2a)
 
Cabozantinib	Advanced renal cell carcin- oma in adults following prior vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
 
A study of cabozantinib (XL184) versus everolimus in subjects with metastatic renal cell carcin- oma (METEOR) [53]
Phase III NCT01865747
 
Everolimus Median OS:
16.5 months
 
OS gain:
4.9 months
 
OS HR: 0.66
(0.53–0.83)
 
–	3 (Form 2a)
 
Lenvatinib in combin-
ation with everolimus
 
Advanced or metastatic renal
cell carcinoma following one prior vascular endothe- lial growth factor-targeted therapy
 
Lenvatinib, everolimus, and the
combination in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a randomised, phase 2, open- label, multicentre trial [54]
Phase II NCT01136733
 
Everolimus
Median OS:
15.4 months
 
OS gain:
10.1 months
 
OS HR: 0.51
(0.30–0.88)
 
_	4 (Form 2a; secondary
end point of OS in a small phase II randomised study)
 
Nivolumab in combin- ation with ipilimumab
 
First-line therapy for inter- mediate- and poor-risk advanced metastatic renal cell carcinoma
 
Nivolumab plus ipilimumab ver- sus sunitinib in advanced renal cell carcinoma (CheckMate 214) [29, 68]
Phase III NCT02231749
 
Sunitinib Median OS:
26.0 months
 
OS gain:
7.3 monthsc
 
OS HR: 0.63
(0.44–0.89)
 
QoL beneﬁt reported in exploratory evaluationd
 
3 (Form 2a)
 
Tivozanib	Recurrent or metastatic renal cell carcinoma with clear cell component, and prior nephrectomy


aEMA approvals from January 2016.
 
Tivozanib versus sorafenib in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma [46]
Phase III NCT01030783
 
Sorafenib Median PFS:
9.1 months
 
PFS gain:
2.8 months
 
PFS HR: 0.80
(0.64–0.99)
 
OS NS
No QoL beneﬁt
 
1 (Form 2b)
 
bESMO-MCBS version 1.1 [69]. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee.
cCalculated conservative estimate of gain based on upper limit of 95% CI (HR 0.78).
dNot eligible for QoL adjustment.
CI, conﬁdence interval; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESMO-MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; HR, hazard ratio; NS, not signiﬁcant; OS, overall survival; PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1; PFS, progression-free survival; QoL, quality of life.
 

 


 
In the management of mRCC patients with brain metastases, the use of corticosteroids can provide effective temporary relief of cere- bral symptoms. WBRT between 20 and 30 Gy in 4–10 fractions, re- spectively, is effective for symptom control [II, B]. Most trials in brain metastasis include only a small proportion of RCC cases [62– 64]. With the use of SRS delivering larger doses per fraction, the mRCC response outcomes are not thought to differ from other solid tumours. For the subset of good-prognosis patients with a sin- gle unresectable brain metastasis, SRS with or without WBRT should be considered [II, A]. There is less reported late cognitive dysfunction using SRS alone compared with the combination ther- apy [II, A]. Adequate control of brain metastases before initiation of anti-VEGF therapy is recommended (expert opinion).
Finally, randomised data from two trials support the use of postoperative SRS following resection of one to three brain meta- stases, although these data should be interpreted with caution.
Multidisciplinary management is needed to optimise care for mRCC patients suffering from bone metastasis. The approach will need to be individualised to the extent of bone metastasis, its loca- tion and potential consequences (see sections above on RT palli- ation and spinal cord compression). In widespread mRCC bone metastasis, bisphosphonate therapy with zoledronic acid has been shown to significantly reduce skeletal-related events (SREs) in patients and increase time to first SRE [65]. The receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) inhibitor denosumab has been shown in a randomised trial to extend the time to first SRE by 4.3 months and was non-inferior to zoledronic acid [66]. In addition, denosumab has the convenience of subcutaneous ad- ministration with no requirement for renal monitoring or dose ad- justment [I, A]. Bone-targeted therapy with either zoledronic acid or denosumab should be considered in mRCC patients with rea- sonable life expectancy and widespread bony metastasis, weighing the potential benefits of the treatment with the potential harms (risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw) [II, A]. Further trials are ongoing to explore its other applications.
 

 
In this disease setting, more research is needed to identify mo- lecular markers which could lead to advances in personalised medicine. However, there is growing evidence that some bio- markers will have clinical implications in the near future, as sug- gested above for papillary RCC with cMET mutation.


Follow-up, long-term implications and	
survivorship	
So far, there is no evidence that early treatment of metastasis results in better outcome of metastatic disease when compared with delayed treatment. Overall, there is no evidence that any par- ticular follow-up protocol influences the outcome in early RCC as well as in advanced RCC.
The follow-up scheme for localised RCC following surgery should depend on the therapeutic possibilities upon recurrence. CT scans of thorax and abdomen are routinely carried out, with time intervals depending on risk factors. It is recommended to perform CT scans every 3–6 months in high-risk patients for the first 2 years, while a yearly CT scan is probably sufficient in low- risk patients (expert opinion).
Long-term follow-up is proposed in some institutions, due to the possibility of late relapse, but its benefit has never been dem- onstrated [67].
During systemic therapy in mRCC patients, 2- to 4-month follow-up schemes with CT scan should be advised to determine response and resistance. Although not perfect, Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (RECIST) remains the most frequently used method to assess drug efficacy. However, in the case of RECIST-defined disease progression, there is no clinical evidence that this quantity of progression is a clinically valid end point that should require treatment interruption or modification.
 
 	 
 
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guidelines development http://www.esmo.org/ Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. A summary of rec- ommendations is shown in Table 6. The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. An ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS) table with MCBS scores is included in Table 7. ESMO-MCBS v1.1 [69] was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA since 1 January 2016. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO- MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee. LoEs and grades of recommendation (GoRs) have been applied using the system shown in Table 8. Statements with- out grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review process.


 
AB took part as a practicing urologist and not as the vice chair of the European Association of Urology (EAU) RCC guideline panel to synchronise the surgical recommendations with the surgical recommendations of the EAU RCC guidelines. The ESMO Guidelines Committee would like to thank the ESMO Faculty and other experts who provided critical reviews of these ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. They would also like to thank the European Cancer Patient Coalition and the Polish Cancer Patient Coalition for their review.


 
BE has reported honoraria for lectures and advisory boards received from Novartis, Pfizer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche, Ipsen, Eisai, EUSA Pharma and Oncorena; CP has reported hon- oraria for lectures and advisory boards received from Novartis, Pfizer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Ipsen, Eisai and Janssen; MS has reported honoraria for lectures and advisory boards from Pfizer, Roche, Novartis, Exelixis, Ipsen, Eisai, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Aveo, Astellas and EUSA Pharma; AB took part in advisory boards for Pfizer, Novartis, Nektar and Eisai; VK has reported honoraria for lectures from Accuray, Astellas, Bayer, Ipsen, Tolmar and advisory boards for Accuray, Astellas and Bayer; VG has reported honoraria from AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eisai, Ipsen, MSD, Merck Serono, Novartis, Pfizer and Roche; ad- visory role for AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Ipsen, MSD, Merck Serono, Novartis, Pfizer and Roche; research grants from AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, MSD, Novartis and Pfizer; SG has reported advisory boards and independent data monitor- ing committees for AAA, Astellas, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cellsearch, Clovis, Curevac, Dendreon, ESSA, Ferring, Innocrin, Janssen, MaxiVAX, Nectar, Orion, ProteoMediX, Roche and Sanofi Aventis; speakers’ bureau participation (compensated) for Janssen and Novartis; speakers’ bureau participation (uncompen- sated) for Astellas, Janssen and Sanofi Aventis; NRL and AH have declared no potential conflicts of interest.
 
1.	Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2016. CA Cancer J Clin 2016; 66(1): 7–30.
2.	Chow WH, Dong LM, Devesa SS. Epidemiology and risk factors for kid- ney cancer. Nat Rev Urol 2010; 7(5): 245–257.
3.	Antwi SO, Eckel-Passow JE, Diehl ND et al. Coffee consumption and risk of renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Causes Control 2017; 28(8): 857–866.
4.	Volpe A, Kachura JR, Geddie WR et al. Techniques, safety and accuracy of sampling of renal tumors by fine needle aspiration and core biopsy. J Urol 2007; 178(2): 379–386.
5.	Marconi L, Dabestani S, Lam TB et al. Systematic review and meta- analysis of diagnostic accuracy of percutaneous renal tumour biopsy. Eur Urol 2016; 69(4): 660–673.
6.	Moch H, Cubilla AL, Humphrey PA et al. The 2016 WHO classification of tumours of the urinary system and male genital organs-part A: renal, penile, and testicular tumours. Eur Urol 2016; 70(1): 93–105.
7.	Hsieh JJ, Purdue MP, Signoretti S et al. Renal cell carcinoma. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2017; 3: 17009.
8.	Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, Linehan WM, Spellman PT et al. Comprehensive molecular characterization of papillary renal-cell carcinomas. N Engl J Med 2016; 374: 135–145.
9.	Davis CF, Ricketts CJ, Wang M et al. The somatic genomic landscape of chromophobe renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Cell 2014; 26(3): 319–330.
10.	Argani P, Reuter VE, Zhang L et al. TFEB-amplified renal cell carcino- mas: an aggressive molecular subset demonstrating variable melanocytic marker expression and morphologic heterogeneity. Am J Surg Pathol 2016; 40(11): 1484–1495.
11.	Becker F, Junker K, Parr M et al. Collecting duct carcinomas represent a unique tumor entity based on genetic alterations. PLoS One 2013; 8(10): e78137.
12.	Malouf GG, Compe´rat E, Yao H et al. Unique transcriptomic profile of collecting duct carcinomas relative to upper tract urothelial carcinomas and other kidney carcinomas. Sci Rep 2016; 6: 30988.
13.	Delahunt B, Cheville JC, Martignoni G et al. The International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) grading system for renal cell carcinoma and other prognostic parameters. Am J Surg Pathol 2013; 37(10): 1490–1504.
14.	Brugarolas J. Molecular genetics of clear-cell renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32(18): 1968–1976.
15.	Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing. N Engl J Med 2012; 366(10): 883–892.
16.	Gerlinger M, Horswell S, Larkin J et al. Genomic architecture and evolu- tion of clear cell renal cell carcinomas defined by multiregion sequencing. Nat Genet 2014; 46(3): 225–233.
17.	Hakimi AA, Pham CG, Hsieh JJ. A clear picture of renal cell carcinoma. Nat Genet 2013; 45(8): 849–850.
18.	Brierley JD, Gospodarowicz MK and Wittekind C (eds). IUCC TNM Classification of Malignant Tumours, 8th edition. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2016; 114–115.
19.	Leibovich BC, Blute ML, Cheville JC et al. Prediction of progression after radical nephrectomy for patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma: a stratification tool for prospective clinical trials. Cancer 2003; 97(7): 1663–1671.
20.	Patard JJ, Kim HL, Lam JS et al. Use of the University of California Los Angeles integrated staging system to predict survival in renal cell carcinoma: an international multicenter study. J Clin Oncol 2004; 22(16): 3316–3322.
21.	Sun M, Shariat SF, Cheng C et al. Prognostic factors and predictive mod- els in renal cell carcinoma: a contemporary review. Eur Urol 2011; 60(4): 644–661.
22.	Motzer RJ, Mazumdar M, Bacik J et al. Survival and prognostic stratifica- tion of 670 patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 1999; 17(8): 2530–2540.
23.	Ko JJ, Xie W, Kroeger N et al. The International Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma Database Consortium model as a prognostic tool in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma previously treated with first-line targeted therapy: a population-based study. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16(3): 293–300.
 
24.	Heng DY, Xie W, Regan MM et al. Prognostic factors for overall survival in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma treated with vascular endothelial growth factor-targeted agents: results from a large, multicen- ter study. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27(34): 5794–5799.
25.	Brooks SA, Brannon AR, Parker JS et al. ClearCode34: a prognostic risk predictor for localized clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Eur Urol 2014; 66(1): 77–84.
26.	Rini B, Goddard A, Knezevic D et al. A 16-gene assay to predict recur- rence after surgery in localised renal cell carcinoma: development and validation studies. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16(6): 676–685.
27.	Kapur P, Pen~a-Llopis S, Christie A et al. Effects on survival of BAP1 and
PBRM1 mutations in sporadic clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma: a retro- spective analysis with independent validation. Lancet Oncol 2013; 14(2): 159–167.
28.	Iacovelli R, Nole` F, Verri E et al. Prognostic role of PD-L1 expression in renal cell carcinoma. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Target Oncol 2016; 11(2): 143–148.
29.	Motzer RJ, Tannir NM, McDermott DF et al. Nivolumab plus ipilimu- mab versus sunitinib in advanced renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2018; 378(14): 1277–1290.
30.	McDermott DF, Huseni MA, Atkins MB et al. Clinical activity and mo- lecular correlates of response to atezolizumab alone or in combination with bevacizumab versus sunitinib in renal cell carcinoma. Nat Med 2018; 24(6): 749–757.
31.	MacLennan S, Imamura M, Lapitan MC et al. Systematic review of onco- logical outcomes following surgical management of localised renal can- cer. Eur Urol 2012; 61(5): 972–993.
32.	Jewett MA, Mattar K, Basiuk J et al. Active surveillance of small renal masses: progression patterns of early stage kidney cancer. Eur Urol 2011; 60(1): 39–44.
33.	Haas NB, Manola J, Uzzo RG et al. Adjuvant sunitinib or sorafenib for high-risk, non-metastatic renal-cell carcinoma (ECOG-ACRIN E2805): a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2016; 387(10032): 2008.
34.	Ravaud A, Motzer RJ, Pandha HS et al. Adjuvant sunitinib in high-risk renal-cell carcinoma after nephrectomy. N Engl J Med 2016; 375(23): 2246–2254.
35.	Motzer RJ, Haas NB, Donskov F et al. Randomized phase III trial of adju-
vant pazopanib versus placebo after nephrectomy in patients with local- ized or locally advanced renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35(35): 3916–3923.
36.	Sun M, Marconi L, Eisen T et al. Adjuvant vascular endothelial growth factor-targeted therapy in renal cell carcinoma: a systematic review and pooled analysis. Eur Urol 2018; 74(5): 611–620.
37.	Flanigan RC, Mickisch G, Sylvester R et al. Cytoreductive nephrectomy
in patients with metastatic renal cancer: a combined analysis. J Urol 2004; 171(3): 1071–1076.
38.	Me´jean A, Ravaud A, Thezenas S et al. Sunitinib alone or after nephrectomy in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2018; 379(5): 417–427.
39.	Bex A, Mulders P, Jewett M et al. Comparison of immediate vs deferred cytoreductive nephrectomy in patients with synchronous metastatic renal cell carcinoma receiving sunitinib: the SURTIME randomized clin- ical trial. JAMA Oncol 2019; 5(2): 164–170.
40.	Dabestani S, Marconi L, Hofmann F et al. Local treatments for metasta- ses of renal cell carcinoma: a systematic review. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15(12): e549–e561.
41.	Rini BI, Dorff TB, Elson P et al. Active surveillance in metastatic renal- cell carcinoma: a prospective, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17(9): 1317–1324.
42.	Escudier B, Pluzanska A, Koralewski P et al. Bevacizumab plus inter- feron alfa-2a for treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a rando- mised, double-blind phase III trial. Lancet 2007; 370(9605): 2103–2111.
43.	Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Tomczak P et al. Sunitinib versus interferon alfa in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2007; 356(2): 115–124.
 
44.	Sternberg CN, Davis ID, Mardiak J et al. Pazopanib in locally advanced or metastatic renal cell carcinoma: results of a randomized phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28(6): 1061–1068.
45.	Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Cella D et al. Pazopanib versus sunitinib in meta- static renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2013; 369(8): 722–731.
46.	Motzer RJ, Nosov D, Eisen T et al. Tivozanib versus sorafenib as initial targeted therapy for patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma: results from a phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31(30): 3791–3799.
47.	Hudes G, Carducci M, Tomczak P et al. Temsirolimus, interferon alfa, or both for advanced renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2007; 356(22): 2271–2281.
48.	Choueiri TK, Hessel C, Halabi S et al. Cabozantinib versus sunitinib as initial therapy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma of intermediate or poor risk (Alliance A031203 CABOSUN randomised trial): progression- free survival by independent review and overall survival update. Eur J Cancer 2018; 94: 115–125.
49.	Rini BI, Escudier B, Tomczak P et al. Comparative effectiveness of axiti- nib versus sorafenib in advanced renal cell carcinoma (AXIS): a rando- mised phase 3 trial. Lancet 2011; 378(9807): 1931–1939.
50.	Motzer RJ, Escudier B, Oudard S et al. RECORD-1 Study Group. Efficacy of everolimus in advanced renal cell carcinoma: a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase III trial. Lancet 2008; 372(9637): 449–456.
51.	Motzer RJ, Escudier B, McDermott DF et al. Nivolumab versus everoli- mus in advanced renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2015; 373(19): 1803–1813.
52.	Choueiri TK, Escudier B, Powles T et al. Cabozantinib versus everolimus in advanced renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2015; 373(19): 1814–1823.
53.	Choueiri TK, Escudier B, Powles T et al. Cabozantinib versus everolimus in advanced renal cell carcinoma (METEOR): final results from a rando- mised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17(7): 917–927.
54.	Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Glen H et al. Lenvatinib, everolimus, and the combination in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a rando- mised, phase 2, open-label, multicentre trial. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16(15): 1473–1482.
55.	Motzer RJ, Porta C, Vogelzang NJ et al. Dovitinib versus sorafenib for third- line targeted treatment of patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma: an open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15(3): 286–296.
56.	Armstrong AJ, Halabi S, Eisen T et al. Everolimus versus sunitinib for patients with metastatic non-clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ASPEN): a multicentre, open-label, randomised phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17(3): 378–388.
57.	Tannir NM, Jonasch E, Albiges L et al. Everolimus versus sunitinib prospect- ive evaluation in metastatic non-clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ESPN): a randomized multicenter phase 2 trial. Eur Urol 2016; 69(5): 866–874.
58.	Scho¨ffski P, Wozniak A, Escudier B et al. Crizotinib achieves long-lasting disease control in advanced papillary renal-cell carcinoma type 1 patients with MET mutations or amplification. EORTC 90101 CREATE trial. Eur J Cancer 2017; 87: 147–163.
59.	Khoo VS, Pyle L. Radiotherapy and supportive care. In: T Eisen, T Christmas (eds). Clinical Progress in Renal Cancer. Oxford: Informa UK Ltd, 2007; 191–201.
60.	De Meerleer G, Khoo V, Escudier B et al. Radiotherapy for renal-cell car- cinoma. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15(4): e170–e177.
61.	Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Regine WF et al. Direct decompressive surgical re- section in the treatment of spinal cord compression caused by metastatic cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet 2005; 366(9486): 643–648.
62.	Andrews DW, Scott CB, Sperduto PW et al. Whole brain radiation ther- apy with or without stereotactic radiosurgery boost for patients with one to three brain metastases: phase III results of the RTOG 9508 randomised trial. Lancet 2004; 363(9422): 1665–1672.
63.	Kocher M, Soffietti R, Abacioglu U et al. Adjuvant whole-brain radio- therapy versus observation after radiosurgery or surgical resection of one to three cerebral metastases: results of the EORTC 22952-26001 study. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29(2): 134–141.
 
64.	Prabhu RS, Patel KR, Press RH et al. Preoperative vs postoperative radio- surgery for resected brain metastases: a review. Neurosurgery 2019; 84(1): 19–29.
65.	Henry DH, Costa L, Goldwasser F et al. Randomized, double-blind study of denosumab versus zoledronic acid in the treatment of bone metastases in patients with advanced cancer (excluding breast and prostate cancer) or multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29(9): 1125–1132.
66.	Rosen LS, Gordon D, Tchekmedyian NS et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of zoledronic acid in the treatment of skeletal metastases in patients with nonsmall cell lung carcinoma and other solid tumors: a randomized, phase III, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Cancer 2004; 100(12): 2613–2621.
 
67.	Dabestani S, Beisland C, Stewart GD   et   al. Long-term outcomes of follow-up for initially localised clear cell renal cell carcinoma: RECUR database analysis. Eur Urol Focus 2018 [epub ahead of print].
68.	Cella D, Grunwald V, Escudier B et al. Patient-reported outcomes of patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma treated with nivolumab plus ipilimumab versus sunitinib (CheckMate 214): a randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2019; 20(2): 297–310.
69.	Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J et al. ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol 2017; 28(10): 2340–2366.
70.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33(2): 139–144.
