




 SPECIAL ARTICLE	

The role of patient-reported outcome measures in the continuum of cancer clinical care: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline5
M. Di Maio1, E. Basch2, F. Denis3,4, L. J. Fallowﬁeld5, P. A. Ganz6, D. Howell7, C. Kowalski8, F. Perrone9, A. M. Stover2,10,
P. Sundaresan11,12, L. Warrington13, L. Zhang14, K. Apostolidis15, J. Freeman-Daily16, C. I. Ripamonti17 & D. Santini18, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1Department of Oncology, University of Turin, at A.O. Ordine Mauriziano Hospital, Turin, Italy; 2Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA; 3Institut Inter-régional de Cancérologie Jean Bernard (ELSAN), Le Mans; 4Faculté de Santé, Université de Paris, Paris, France; 5Sussex Health Outcomes Research & Education in Cancer, Brighton & Sussex Medical School, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, UK; 6Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), USA; 7Department of Supportive Care, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 8Department of Certification e Health Services Research, German Cancer Society, Berlin, Germany; 9Clinical Trial Unit, National Cancer Institute IRCCS G. Pascale Foundation, Naples, Italy; 10Department of Health Policy and Management, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA; 11Sydney West Radiation Oncology Network, Westmead Hospital, Westmead; 12Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; 13Leeds Institute of Medical Research at St James’s, University of Leeds, St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, UK; 14Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China; 15European Cancer Patient Coalition, Brussels, Belgium; 16The ROS1ders, Sacramento, USA; 17Oncology - Supportive Care in Cancer Unit, Department Oncology-Haematology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori Milano, Milan; 18Medical Oncology Department, University Campus Bio-Medico, Rome, Italy

Available online 21 April 2022



 

INTRODUCTION
Patients with cancer frequently experience symptoms related to their disease or treatment-related toxicities. Symptom management through optimal supportive care is a foundation of quality care. While objective toxicities and laboratory results are amenable to reporting by health care personnel, subjective experiences such as symptoms are best reported by patients themselves.1 Traditionally, pa- tients are relied upon to discuss symptoms and side-effects with the clinical team during hospital and clinic visits, when contacting their health care team between visits via tele- phone or, more recently, electronic messaging.
Prior research indicates that health care providers often under-detect symptoms or underestimate their severity.2-6 This is especially true when side-effects or symptoms are not life-threatening4 although impacting quality of life (QoL). Prior publications demonstrate a lack of concordance between symptom recognition by clinicians and patient self- reporting.3,7-9 For instance, in one large clinical trial patients rated several tamoxifen-related symptoms (hot ﬂushes, weight gain, night sweats, sleeping difficulties and loss of libido) as severe, but concordance of these with clinicians’


*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: June 2022.
0923-7534/© 2022 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 

recordings at any severity was less than expected by chance.8 Likewise, in 1090 patients with breast or lung cancer included in three randomised trials, the reporting of significant chemotherapy (ChT)-related toxicity (all symp- toms analysed), e.g. diarrhoea, nausea, anorexia were under-reported by clinicians in terms of incidence and severity.9 Suboptimal symptom detection by clinicians can potentially lead to delayed or suboptimal management and may affect adherence to therapies, symptom control, pa- tient QoL and survival.
Reasons for discrepancies between reports by clinicians and patients may include a failure to ask questions sys- tematically, time constraints of busy clinic visits and attri- bution bias (focusing only on expected or serious adverse events rather than symptoms the patient may be experi- encing).10 Additionally, patients may feel hesitant to mention certain symptoms or worry that treatment might be stopped if they express complaints.11 Patients also report difficulty remembering symptoms experienced be- tween clinic visits.12,13
Symptom monitoring via patient-reported outcomes (PROs) offers an evidence-based approach to detecting symptoms which can provide critical information to clini- cians, thereby improving clinical management. PROs are defined as ‘any report of the status of a patient’s health condition that comes directly from the patient without interpretation of the patient’s response by a clinician or anyone else’.14 Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) are tools and/or instruments used to report PROs,
 
M. Di Maio et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
usually questionnaires (although they can include stand- ardised interview schedules), to assess elements of their experience such as symptom burden, functional status and psychological and emotional well-being.15 In clinical prac- tice, PROMs can be used to foster communication between patients and clinicians, assist in the detection and man- agement of treatment toxicities and disease progression or recurrence and facilitate optimal delivery of supportive care.1,16
The opportunity to use PROMs completed by patients and received by nurses and/or doctors enables timely and systematic assessment of clinical trends of symptoms and side-effects.17 The use of electronic systems for adminis- tering PROMs to patients with cancer and communicating this information back to their clinicians has been shown to improve symptom control, physical function, QoL, adher- ence to treatment, reduction in emergency room and hos- pital admissions and survival.18-22

USE OF PROMS IN PATIENTS UNDERGOING ACTIVE CANCER TREATMENT
Clinical scenarios
For patients receiving curative therapy (e.g. definitive, adjuvant or neoadjuvant), the treatment goal is to eradicate the disease. In such patients, combined modality therapy is common, and patients often receive intensive treatments that produce considerable toxicity. These include organ- preserving regimens, such as definitive radiotherapy (RT) combined with radio-sensitising ChT (as in the treatment of head and neck, anal, lung and cervical cancers), adjuvant therapy following radical surgery (as in breast, colon and lung cancers) or neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy preceding radical surgery (as in oesophageal and rectal cancer). The morbidity of each treatment is often magnified because of overlapping toxicity. In this setting, however, clinicians and patients may be willing to tolerate the intensity and severity of symptoms in hopes of achieving a cure. Using PROMs to describe the severity and type of symptoms can help identify symptoms that would benefit from supportive in- terventions, determine the recovery time needed to return to usual activities and prepare future patients for what to expect during and after treatment. Automated advice feedback to the patient can facilitate self-management at home, particularly for milder symptoms detected by PROMs.23
Patients receiving RT with curative or palliative intent can experience acute toxicities, depending on the dose and schedule of treatment. These primarily occur in the field of treatment and can be severe. Fatigue can be a debilitating symptom during the later phases of RT treatments. PROMs could be used to monitor physical functioning and ability to complete usual activities in this setting and to anticipate and intervene in patients who may be deteriorating during the treatment and/or immediately following treatment.
In the setting of advanced or metastatic disease, mea- surement of PROs is valuable for detecting symptoms and functional impairment associated with  both disease and
 
treatment. In these patients, for whom palliation is the primary goal of any intervention, regular assessment of PROs is central to informing clinical supportive manage- ment. Increasingly, patients with cancer are receiving sys- temic treatment over an extended period. These therapies include maintenance ChT or biological agents, endocrine therapies, targeted therapies, immunotherapy and a com- bination of these. When treatments are expected to last for many months or even years, side-effects that impact QoL, even at a low level, are more likely to result in non- adherence. Regular measurement of PROs permits early identification of the difficulties patients are experiencing and offers opportunities to discuss modified dosing and supportive care.
PROMs that monitor symptoms and physical functioning can also address post-treatment and survivorship concerns. Some persisting symptoms such as pain, fatigue, sleep disturbance, cognitive difficulties, distress, depression and sexual issues are important to measure in the post- treatment period.

Evidence supporting the adoption of PROMs in clinical practice
Prospective trials and population-based studies have demonstrated improved outcomes when electronic PROMs are implemented for monitoring patients during routine cancer treatment with systemic therapies, including im- provements in physical function, symptom control, health- related QoL, hospitalisations, overall survival (OS), patient satisfaction and cost-effectiveness15,18-26 (Figure 1). Com- mon features of the electronic PROM systems used in these studies include the availability of PRO questions via the web, handheld devices and/or automated telephone sys- tems, inclusion of questions for common cross-cutting PROs from prior research (e.g. pain, nausea, vomiting, con- stipation, diarrhoea, dyspnoea, insomnia, depression and physical function), electronic prompts and reminders to self-report via email, text or automated telephone, use of validated symptom questions based on prior research and automated alerts to clinicians for severe or worsening symptoms. Multiple academic and commercial systems are available that include these features.
A 2014 systematic review of controlled trials evaluated whether the inclusion of PROMs in routine clinical practice was associated with improvements in patient outcomes, processes of care and health service outcomes during active cancer treatment.24 Studies were heterogeneous in terms of settings and methods: some used paper-based tools in the clinic, whereas others used electronic tools at home. In some studies, the use of PROMs was associated with improved symptom control, increased supportive care measures and patient satisfaction, although with limited statistically significant findings and predominantly small-to- moderate effect sizes.
Subsequently, several randomised controlled trials (RCTs) tested remote monitoring by electronic PROM web appli- cations in patients undergoing active cancer treatment of
 
Annals of Oncology	M. Di Maio et al.













Figure 1. Therapeutic beneﬁts of optimal implementation of PROMs in routine and remote cancer care.
ED, emergency department; PROM, patient-reported outcome measure; QoC, quality of care; QoL, quality of life.

 
different types of cancer18-20,23,27-30 (see Table 1 for details on the questionnaires and software used within each trial). In the seminal trial conducted at Memorial Sloan Ket- tering Cancer Center, 766 patients receiving routine outpatient ChT for advanced solid tumours were rando- mised to either receive usual care (consisting of symptom monitoring at clinicians’ discretion) or to report 12 com- mon symptoms via a remote system at home or on tablets or computers in the hospital waiting room.18 Self-reporting was conducted via the web-based interface STAR (Symp- tom Tracking and Reporting), and included questions adapted for patient use from the National Cancer Institute’s Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE), pertaining to 12 common symptoms experienced during ChT, graded on a five-point scale from 0 (not present) to 4 (disabling). STAR did not allow skipped questions or free- text responses. Nurses received e-mail alerts when partic- ipants reported severe or worsening symptoms, and treating physicians received symptom printouts at visits. Symptom monitoring was associated with significantly improved QoL, reduction in emergency room admissions and hospitalisations. In addition, analysis of OS found a significant prolongation of life with the use of the reporting
system.19
The PRO-TECT cluster randomised trial, conducted at 52 United States community oncology practice centres, compared digital symptom monitoring with PROMs
 
(treatment arm) with usual care (control) in 1191 patients with metastatic cancer receiving active treatment.20 Pa- tients in the treatment arm were invited to complete a weekly survey via the web or an automated telephone system for up to 1 year, which included items from the PRO version of the CTCAE about common symptoms, as well as performance status, financial toxicity and falls. The digital PRO-TECT electronic PRO (ePRO) system used in the study was built by the University of North Carolina’s PROs Core. Severe or worsening symptoms triggered electronic alerts to care team nurses and reports showing the trend of symptoms over time were available to oncologists at visits. Mean changes from baseline were significantly better with digital monitoring for physical function, symptom control and health-related QoL. Clinically meaningful benefits were experienced by 13.8% more patients with digital monitoring versus control in physical function, 16.1% in symptom control and 13.4% in QoL. Additional outcomes such as effects on hospitalisations and survival have not yet been reported.
Although RCTs represent the highest level of evidence supporting the efficacy of PROM implementation, important evidence comes also from real-world data and non-randomised studies. A population-based, retrospec- tive, matched cohort analysis examined the effect of the exposure to the Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS) on patient survival, rates of emergency visits and
 
M. Di Maio et al.	Annals of Oncology

Table 1. Most relevant randomised studies of remote monitoring by ePRO web application in patients undergoing active cancer treatment (any type of cancer)a
Author, year	Number of Setting
patients	Questionnaires used	Software	Multicentric trial	Improved outcome
Berry L, 201427	752	Patients with cancer, any stage
(about 1/3 metastatic), starting
a new therapeutic regime	SDS-15	ESRA-C	Yes	Symptom control
Strasser F, 201628   264	Patients with advanced cancer,
receiving ChT	ESAS	E-MOSAIC,
(generating a LoMoS)	Yes	Symptom control
Basch E, 201618,19   766	Patients with metastatic cancer,
initiating ChT	NCI-CTCAE	STAR	No	QoL/OS/reduced emergency use
Mir O, 202029	609	Patients with advanced cancer,
receiving oral treatment
(except hormonal therapy)	PRO-CTCAE	CAPRI RPMS	No	Dose intensity/reduction in hospitalisation
Absolom K, 202123 508	Patients with cancer, all stages
(62.4% primary or local), initiating systemic treatment (ChT with or
without targeted therapies)	NCI-CTCAE	eRAPID	No	QoL/symptom control
Mooney K, 202130   252	Patients with cancer, any stage,
receiving ChT and/or RT	MDASI and NIH PROMIS	SCH	No	QoL/symptom control/ reduction in unplanned
health care episodes
Basch E, 202120	1191	Patients with advanced cancer,
receiving systemic therapy	PRO-CTCAE	PRO-TECT digital ePRO system	Yes	QoL/symptom control/ physical function
CAPRI RPMS, Cancerologie Parcours Région Ile de France Remote Patient Monitoring Systems; ChT, chemotherapy; E-MOSAIC, electronic monitoring of symptoms and syndromes associated with cancer; ePRO, electronic patient-reported outcome; eRAPID, electronic patient self-reporting of adverse-events: patient information and advice; ESAS, Edmonton Symptom Assessment System; ESRA-C Electronic Self-Report Assessment-Cancer; LoMoS, longitudinal monitoring sheet; MDASI, MD Anderson Symptom Inventory; NCI-CTCAE, National Cancer Institute-Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events; NIH PROMIS, National Institute of Health Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System; OS, overall survival; PRO-CTCAE, Patient-Reported Outcomes version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events; QoL, quality of life; RT, radiotherapy; SCH, Symptom Care at Home; SDS, Symptom Distress Scale; STAR, Symptom Tracking and Reporting.
aSee Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.04.007 for relevant references and information on electronic medical record systems that have
been used for symptom monitoring during usual care.

 

hospitalisations. The ESAS is a validated instrument to measure symptoms among ambulatory cancer patients, the use of which has been standardised in the Ontario cancer practice network.21,22 The analysis, conducted in 128 893 pairs of patients with cancer between 2007 and 2015, showed improved survival and reduced rates of emergency visits and hospitalisations for patients exposed to the ESAS.

Recommendations
Digital symptom monitoring with PROMs in routine clin- ical care during systemic cancer treatment is recommen- ded, based on evidence of benefits on communication, satisfaction, treatment adherence, symptom control, QoL, emergency room and hospital admissions and sur- vival [I, A].
The use of an ePRO system or device with the following key features is recommended: availability of PRO ques- tions to patients via the web, a handheld device and/ or an automated telephone system, inclusion of ques- tions for common cross-cutting PROs from prior research (e.g. pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation, diar- rhoea, dyspnoea, insomnia, depression and physical function), electronic prompts and reminders to patients to self-report via email, text or automated telephone, use of validated symptom questions based on prior research and automated alerts to clinicians for severe or worsening symptoms [I, A].
 

Considering that multiple academic and commercial sys- tems are available that include these features, the use of systems that have produced compelling evidence of benefit within randomised trials [such as STAR, PRO- TECT, electronic patient self-reporting of adverse events (eRAPID) and other systems listed in Table 1] are recom- mended [I, A].
Other systems could be recommended only if they have similar functionality and are designed in accordance with information in the following sections [V, B].
See Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.04.007 for relevant refer- ences and information on electronic medical record (EMR) systems that have been used for symptom moni- toring during usual care.
Alternatives to ePRO collection could ensure that data collection does not exclude the participation of patients from under-served groups (see below, Modes of admin- istration) [V,B].

PROMS IN CLINICAL PRACTICE
When implementing PROMs in practice, decision makers must select: the outcomes to be elicited (i.e. what specific symptoms, functional domains or other PROs); the instru- ment to be administered (i.e. what questionnaire or item library will be used for patients to report on the selected outcomes); and the mode of data collection (i.e. web-based, downloadable application, automated telephone call with
 
Annals of Oncology	M. Di Maio et al.

 
interactive voice response, which does not require internet access or paper).

Selection of outcomes
A caution to decision makers is not to start their process by choosing a particular instrument, but rather to consider what outcomes are important in a given population. This is particularly useful when validated item libraries are used, which allow a PROM to be built with a restricted subgroup of items from the whole library set. Outcomes to be assessed in a routine clinical care setting should be mean- ingful in the target population (i.e. prevalent and/or im- pactful on function or QoL) and clinically actionable (i.e. a management approach exists for clinicians to address the problem(s) through action, such as modifying cancer treatment or adding a supportive therapy). Patient input at the stages of design and implementation should be incor- porated, and item selection should be broad enough to allow for the representation of patient values, even if they do not overlap with physician views.
A decision must be made on whether the same outcomes will be elicited from all patients completing PROMs, or if there will be customisation based on variable characteristics of patient subpopulations, e.g. based on cancer type or disease stage (localised or advanced/metastatic disease status), active treatment versus survivorship, treatment type (ChT, immunotherapy, targeted agents, RT, surgery) or other variables. Some items, such as pain, constipation and performance status are meaningful across most cancer populations; however, in contrast, erectile dysfunction may be a meaningful and actionable outcome in men following curative surgery for localised prostate cancer, but it may be less informative for other cancers. Fatigue is common in patients with cancer, irrespective of tumour site.31 Psy- chological morbiditydespecially anxiety and depressiondis a ubiquitous feature across most patients. Suicide is a rare but relevant issue; questions about this are often not included, due to insufficient monitoring by clinicians to ensure a timely response.32
Other variables best known by the patient that may
impact care delivery can also be considered, such as social determinants of health (availability of a caregiver, trans- portation access, financial barriers or toxicity, social func- tion, etc.).
When administering the same PROM or instrument across the entire population, a cross-cutting ‘core set’ of common symptoms can be selected, as well as additional common domains such as patient-reported performance status or physical function.33 Although management of free text is not standardised, an open ‘free-text’ option can be included for patients to add in any additional symptoms they are experiencing that are not in the selected outcomes.34

Selection of instruments
Once the appropriate outcomes for a given population have been identified, an optimal instrument must be selected
 
that can elicit them. Choice of the tool should be made from existing questionnaires, or grouping of individual items taken from a well-developed item library [e.g. European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC), ESAS, Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy (FACT), the MD Anderson Symptom Inventory (MDASI), PRO-CTCAE, Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement In- formation System (PROMIS) and Symptoms Distress Scale (SDS-15)], or locally created using robust methodology35 or a combination of these.
It is recommended that instruments have established measurement properties, including qualitative and quanti- tative validity, reliability, responsiveness/sensitivity, and an acceptable recall period, in accordance with existing best practices for developing and evaluating PROMs.14,36-41 Once PROMs with adequate psychometric properties are identi- fied, final instrument(s) can be selected by comparing item content (e.g. symptom types) to best fit the patient popu- lation and goal of the assessment. Many existing in- struments were initially developed for research purposes; their appropriateness when used in a non-research context, such as supporting clinical care, should be examined. This is both a challenge and an opportunity of the implementation of PROMs in clinical practice (see below, Applicability and limitations).
To avoid patient burden and to increase completion rates, the number of items in any PROM should be carefully considered. Although there is no strict rule regarding the number of items, the more often an instrument is admin- istered to a patient, the shorter the application should be. For weekly administration, many successful experiences have adopted 10-20 items.18,20 When selecting instruments, the feasibility of administering items electronically should be considered, e.g. avoiding lengthy questions or response options that may not be compatible with mobile device screens or automated telephone administration. The re- sponses should be easily interpretable by clinicians when visualised in alerts or reports.
The desirable characteristics of tools to use for remote symptom monitoring are described in Supplementary Table S2, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc. 2022.04.007.

Modes of administration
Models based on paper toolsdreviewed and discussed at hospital visits by clinicians able to interpret these types of datadallow improvements in symptom assessment and evaluation of ameliorative interventions. Models based on remote monitoring and electronic tools have the added value of providing alerts between visits and allowing for an earlier management of critical clinical issues. Prior research and consensus recommendations suggest similar perfor- mance of PROMs regardless of method of administration if only minor alterations of the instrument have been made between different modes. Thus, formal equivalence evalu- ation is generally not necessary when adapting or con- verting between modes.42 Patients may self-report at clinic
 
M. Di Maio et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
visits via clinic-based devices and/or from home between visits using their own devices.
Based on the available body of evidence, a general approach has evolved to allow the remote electronic completion of PROMs, not only at clinic visits but also be- tween visits. This involves loading a PROM into a software system and enabling patient self-reporting by the web, a downloadable mobile application or an automated tele- phone call on a regular basis.
Electronic platforms are preferable to paper for data ﬂow and timeliness, although paper administration or staff-administered questionnaires may serve as a backup data collection approach for patients unwilling or unable to report for themselves (this issue can be particularly relevant in some clinical settings or some geographical or socio- economical contexts). Some patients may experience access barriers, increased age (although the use of electronic de- vices, e.g. mobile phones, is increasing substantially even among older patients), a medical barrier to using a screen or limited internet connectivity. Although paper question- naires do not allow for real-time communication between visits or an automated interface with EMRs, they have shown benefits in reducing under-reporting and improving QoL of patients undergoing active treatment, particularly when systematically shared with providers at visits.43 For those participants who are not able to use electronic de- vices, family or caregivers should have the ability to report on behalf of the patient, with software capturing who completed the PROM in the system (e.g. with an item asking who completed the PROM).
Patient preferences and potential limitations should be considered when selecting mode(s) of administration. Prior research shows that patients have varying preferences for mode of PROM completion. For example, in a United States study using home PROM reporting, >35% of patients receiving systemic cancer therapy preferred interactive voice response over the web, a choice associated with lower education and older age.44 Therefore, when feasible, more than one mode should be offered to ensure that vulnerable populations are able to have access to a survey platform.45
Some key functionalities of electronic PROM systems that add value include: the generation of reports or visual- isations for clinicians to review the longitudinal trajectory of PROs; the generation of automated patient self-care advice on actions they can take for the management of mild symptoms; and the ability to alert clinicians when patients report symptoms or physical function impairments of a magnitude or level of worsening that warrants clinical attention. When implementing any PROM system, workﬂow and staff capacity must be considered to ensure that clini- cians have ample time allocated for reviewing alerts and reports.
Software considerations
Once an instrument is selected, it must be loaded into the mode(s) for administration. In recent years, multiple aca- demic and commercial PROM software systems have been
 
developed and are available for adoption in clinical practice. Integration into the EMR is also possible for some vendors. A variety of instruments have produced data of acceptable usability by both patients and clinicians, and some have produced data of efficacy from randomised trials to support their use (e.g. ESAS, PRO-CTCAE).
PROM software system functionality should have a mechanism for registering patients, clinicians and admin- istrative staff into the system, be able to trigger a prompt to patients to report at specified time points, administer instrument items to patients, trigger alerts to clinicians when patient responses reach specified thresholds for magnitude or worsening and generate reports for clinicians to view.46
Software should undergo usability testing to ensure ease of use for patients and providers and comprehensibility of navigation.47 Testing should ensure that patients with limited health literacy are able to understand and navigate the system. Barriers to patient adherence include complex passwords, difficult navigation and lack of a prompt func- tionality. Access and affordability in the population must be considered; for example, reliance on smartphones in a setting where patients face challenges with internet con- nectivity or the cost of data plans may threaten the feasi- bility of a PROM programme. Access by clinicians should also be considered to guarantee that the system can be integrated into the existing information ﬂow and workﬂow without inconvenience to users.
A single software system containing the multiple key functionalities of PROMs for all cancer types is ideal to avoid multiple platforms for a single patient and to mini- mise technology burden on the clinical team.20,48 There is an increasing interest in integrating PROM systems with EMRs to enable data visualisation, storage and manage- ment within a single clinical system, although these in- tegrations can be technically challenging.
Optional functionalities may include skip patterns for items, ability to show results to patients within the plat- form, capacity to provide educational materials or advice to patients on self-management, an open free-text box for patients to provide information not contained in the in- strument and integration with EMRs.
Because patient information is conveyed and stored by these systems, attention to privacy and security is essential. A balance must be struck between privacy, security and ease of use. Privacy and security must be assured, but ac- cess cannot be overly cumbersome, or patients and clini- cians will not use the system. If a system is only collecting information from patients but not showing results back to patients, security precaution levels could be lower, as uni- directional data ﬂow may reduce the risk of third parties accessing patient information. If users are prompted to participate by messages (text, email or telephone call) on their own password-protected devices, additional pass- words may not be necessary. This could not be acceptable in contexts where two-factor authentication is mandatory. PROM software systems often include a disclaimer state- ment to patients, developed with legal consultation, stating
 

Volume 33 ■ Issue 9 ■ 2022	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.04.007	883
 
Annals of Oncology	M. Di Maio et al.

 
that information entered in the system might not be rapidly reviewed by clinicians, and, therefore, for urgent problems patients should call the office or seek emergency assistance. Specific regulation in Europe for these instruments is reported in Section 1 Supplementary Material, available at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.04.007.

Recommendations
Outcomes assessed by PROMs in clinical care should be meaningful and clinically actionable in the target popula- tion [I, A].
PROM questionnaires or items should have demonstrated measurement properties including validity, reliability and responsiveness to change [I, A].
Administering the same PROMs across an entire popula- tion of patients is suggested, by employing a cross- cutting ‘core set’ of common symptoms and optionally a modular approach with additional items, based on can- cer type or other variables [V, B].
Limiting the number of items to avoid burden on patients and to ensure patient participation is suggested [V, B]. When feasible, more than one mode of administration should be offered to ensure that vulnerable populations are able to have access to a survey platform [V, B].


RESPONDING TO PROMS DATA AND REMOTE MONITORING ALERTS
The use of PROMs in routine care is shaped by clinician re- lationships with patients, professional roles and workﬂow.49 Essential to the effectiveness of programmes is a clear delineation of responsibilities and expectations of team members; training in analysis, interpretation and actions in response to PROMs data; and thoughtful design of workﬂow for various users.50,51 Determining which clinician(s) will have primary responsibility for reviewing and acting upon collected data for patient management is paramount for meaningful integration into routine clinical care.52-55 Nurses, psychologists, allied health team members and physicians may all have roles and responsibilities in responding to PROMs data (e.g. psychologists or social workers may be designated to act upon emotional distress data based on severity). Teams may need to develop new ways of working together to ensure an effective and efficient response to PROM data from a multidisciplinary perspective.
Evidence-based symptom management algorithms and pathways can also facilitate a quality response to PROM data. It should be recognised that PRO monitoring can detect a problem and its severity, however, further focused assessment and dialogue with the patient is still necessary to guide the selection of interventions and a supportive care plan (Figure 2). Patients and caregivers can also play a role in yielding benefits of PRO monitoring, e.g. by following self- management advice from a PROM digital system.56,57 Pa- tients require clear direction on the self-management actions they can take in response to PROM data as an integral component of patient management.
 
Nursesdwho frequently represent the first line of clinical contact in oncology caredvalue PROM data for clinical practice48 and can assume a central role in reviewing and acting upon these data.58,59 Systematic reviews of RCTs and quasi-experimental studies show that the involvement of oncologists and expert nurses in the provision of information, education and supportive counselling has beneficial effects on physical, psychological and QoL outcomes across the continuum of cancer care.60-63 These nursing roles are well aligned to act on PROM data to improve patient outcomes. Specific to acting on PROM data, RCTs of remote symp- tom monitoring during cancer treatment have shown that oncology nurses and/or nurse practitioners can effectively manage moderate and severe symptom alerts between clinic visits, with evidence of benefits on symptom burden, QoL, healthcare utilisation18,64-66 and survival.19 A trial of remote symptom monitoring showed that nurse-led coaching in symptom self-management reduced symptom distress,67 whereas PRO feedback to the clinical team without explicit designation of who or how to act upon these data did not show a similar effect.68 In PROM implementation studies in routine care, nurses were ex- pected to use these data to initiate discussions on the most concerning patient symptoms or problems; to apply best practice interventions; to manage symptoms and other problems; and to identify and refer patients whose symp- toms require escalation to oncologists and/or psychosocial specialists.69-71 The role of nurses as first responders can then be followed by oncologists’ responses (e.g. changes in treatment/prescriptions) as required.17 Although nurse impact on outcomes in response to acting upon PROM data is synergistic to actions taken by the clinical team overall, studies show reduced symptom distress, health care uti- lisation and improved patient activation when nurses are designated and trained to act upon PROM data.72-74 Research is now focused on PROM-driven nurse-led con- sultations in feasibility and acceptability, with multiple smaller studies and recent large-scale trials demonstrating
effectiveness.20,75,76
In order for nurses and other personnel to address PROM data, adequate resources should be allocated to this re- sponsibility, rather than adding it on top of other duties. Nurses involved in PRO programmes have provided feed- back saying that they value the information, but need to have dedicated time to address patient needs resulting from symptom monitoring.48
In summary, there is evidence that nurses play a central role in reviewing and acting upon PROM data in routine care to improve symptom management and QoL. PRO monitoring in the absence of clinical integration and designated personnel to act on the PROM data likely will not yield substantial clinical benefits.

Recommendations
Clinical personnel at sites routinely collecting PROMs should receive training on the review and interpretation of PROMs data [I, A].
 
M. Di Maio et al.	Annals of Oncology



 
•	Electronic (portal or app) or paper-based completion of PROMs
•	Done routinely during clinic visits or pre-visit
•	Patient prompted to complete at clinic registration or pre-visit
 
•	Remote electronic completion of PROMs
•	Done between clinic visits
•	Patient prompted via text or e-mail to complete PROMs
 

 


•	Summarised PROM score report feedback to clinical team to use at visit, using EMR or paper copy on clinic chart
•	Possible printed report given to patient
 
•	Alerts for moderate and/or severe and/or worsening symptoms sent to message pool or to primary review e-mail
 

•	For mild symptoms, patient may receive automated self-care advice
 

•	Oncology nurse or nurse navigator is assigned to triage alerts

 
•	Assigned member of clinic team reviews report and opens dialogue with patient about the report
•	If other reviewera, patient would value physician acknowledgement of report
 



•	Nurse completes focused assessment for alerting symptoms via phone
 


 

•	Priority concerns are addressed
•	Visit expectations and shared agenda are set (addressing the question, what matters most)
 

•	Focused assessment for moderate and severe symptoms
•	Set goals for symptom control
 

•	Symptom management interventions (evidence- based) and counseling in use
•	Coaching in
self-management
 


•	For emergencies:
•	Nurse directs patient to ED
•	Nurse notifies physician
 



 

•	Shared treatment plan
•	Tailored supportive care for symptom management
•	Guideline-based approach
 
•	Assess patient self- management capacity
•	Set a clear action plan for symptom self- management
 
•	Escalation of alert to physician if medical attention is required
•	Clear escalation protocol agreed among team
•	Immediate patient contact via phone



Physical visit NOT required	Medical attention required
 


 
•	Set plan for proactive follow-up
 

•	Physician manages remotely by phone or e-mail
 

•	Patient scheduled for urgent clinic visit
 



•	Alert is documented and closed


Figure 2.  Model for PRO use in routine patient management and for handling remote symptom alerts.
ED, emergency department; EMR, electronic medical record; PRO, patient-reported outcome; PROM, patient-reported outcome measure.
aOther reviewers may include non-medical personnel, typically nurses.
 
Annals of Oncology	M. Di Maio et al.

 
Provider organisations and clinical teams should clarify personnel roles and responsibilities and redesign work- ﬂows to ensure PROMs data are reviewed and acted upon [I, A].
Oncology nurses or other allied health support (e.g. social workers) with appropriate training should serve as first responders to PRO alerts [I, A].


USE OF PROMS AFTER TREATMENT IN PATIENTS AT HIGH RISK OF RECURRENCE AND/OR TREATMENT-RELATED SIDE-EFFECTS
Some therapies are administered for a limited number of cycles, and patients without progressive disease at the end of treatment undergo periodic follow-ups to check for progression. For these patients, the use of PROMs may play a role in the detection of recurrence and late effects, as well as management of residual toxicities and disease symptoms (Figure 1).
In a French multicentre randomised trial conducted in 133 patients with advanced-stage lung cancer (72% had stage IIIB/IV cancer), PROMs were used in the experi- mental arm with the aim of early detection of symp- tomatic complications and relapse after the end of their first-line or maintenance treatment.77 Patients underwent imaging every 3-6 months and reported symptoms weekly via a web system. Nurses were alerted by email in the case of new or changed symptoms. Survival was the primary outcome of the study. The study showed that, due to the alerts from the remote monitoring web application, more patients attended unscheduled visits in the experimental arm (58.3%) than in the control arm (24.6%, P 0.008). Use of remote monitoring was associated with a better performance status at the time of relapse: the performance status at first relapse was 0-1 in 75.9% of the patients in the experimental arm and 32.5% in the control arm (P < 0.001), leading to optimal treatment in 72.4% of the patients in the experimental arm and in 32.5% in the control arm (P < 0.001). A median survival benefit of 7 months was observed after 2 years of follow-up.78 Study procedures (the rules for medical team notifications) were created in 2013 and have not been tested with new drugs and standards of care, such as combined immuno-ChT maintenance. A randomised trial is ongoing with new standards of lung cancer care to assess the validity of this approach (Netherlands Trial register Trial NL7897).
Research on PRO monitoring in other cancer types
following treatment is warranted.

Recommendations
Symptom monitoring with PROMs is suggested for pa- tients with stage IIIB/IV lung cancer who have completed initial or maintenance treatment [II, B].
Symptom monitoring with PROMs to manage persisting or new symptoms such as pain, fatigue, sleep distur- bance, distress, depression, sexual health and cognitive
 
difficulties, can be useful in the post-treatment period of patients with cancer [V, C].

USE OF PROMS IN END-OF-LIFE CARE
End-of-life care is defined as care for people with advanced disease once they have reached a point of rapid physical decline, typically the last few weeks or months before an inevitable death as a natural result of a disease.79
In these patients, the main objective of care is QoL, and active cancer treatment should be discontinued. Monitoring should be focused on symptoms of disease and residual toxicities, although completion of PROMs in seriously ill patients can be a challenge.
Unfortunately, few studies have specifically focused on the use of PROMs in this setting. Many experiences in the palliative care setting include end-of-life care, but also pa- tients with advanced disease, who are still on active treat- ment.80 A study evaluating remote monitoring, including a distress thermometer and the Chemotherapy Symptom Assessment Scale, found it was feasible and acceptable by patients being cared for at home in the advanced stage of their illness.81
Research on PRO monitoring in end-of-life care is warranted.

Recommendation
The use of symptom monitoring with PROMs in patients with cancer near the end of life, which may support symptom control, should be considered [III, C].

USE OF PROMS IN FOLLOW-UP AND SURVIVORSHIP
There is limited evidence on the use of PROMs in post- treatment cancer survivorship. Assessment of core symp- tomsdincluding depression, anxiety, pain, fatigue, cogni- tive problems, fear of cancer recurrence or progression, QoL, health status and/or financial distressdcould improve patient-clinician communication and avoid suboptimal symptom management.82,83 Other PROs may also be helpful to measure parameters such as self-efficacy and/or self- management capacity, health behaviours, physical func- tioning and sexual health, in order to alert care providers to the need for rehabilitation services.
Implementation of PROMs in survivorship care for lon- gitudinal surveillance may be challenging due to variation in follow-up schedules; thus, standardised timeframes using remote monitoring may be needed. Research is warranted in this area.

Recommendation
The use of PROMs in survivorship care of patients after treatment of cancer, to improve communication and identify late toxicities, symptoms or functional impair- ment warranting supportive care, should be considered [V, C].
 
M. Di Maio et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
BEST PRACTICE AND IMPLEMENTATION OF PROMS IN THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
Given the demonstrated clinical benefits of digital symptom monitoring with PROMs in clinical practice,84 oncology practices are increasingly interested in implementing PROMs in clinics for usual care. Several resources are available to help cancer centres think through barriers and implementation solutions,50,53,54 although the evidence level is still not high. Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.04.007, lists several PROM implementation guides that are available open ac- cess and describe established best practices in both aca- demic cancer centres and community oncology practices.
Across these implementation guides, general PROM implementation steps include:
Pre-implementation planning: stakeholder engagement, identifying champion(s), technology solution, determining barriers and discussion about additional resources and ca- pacity needs
Delineating and/or revising clinic workﬂow for the care team to respond to PROMs as part of patient management
Training care teams and staff to interpret and use PROMs during discussions with patients
Testing, go live and identifying and solving problems Evaluating and course corrections
Monitoring and maintaining high-quality PROM use through continued engagement with clinics

Success rates of PROM implementation programmes have been variable51,85 and are   dependent   on   the   level of organisational commitment and available resourcesd planning, technology usability, engagement of clinic stake- holders, training, monitoring and oversight.50,51,53,54 Assuring that personnel (particularly nurses) have protected time for handling PROM alerts is necessary. Like other clinical infor- matics and care enhancement programmes, PROM imple- mentation has a high risk of failure if key principles are missing.85-87 Implementing and sustaining PROMs requires the engagement of clinical and administrative staff and leadership, as well as patients. Therefore, a systematic approach with tailored implementation support and effective oversight is critical.
Barriers to implementing PROMs in routine care are
consistent across patient populations, care settings and even countries, but facilitating factors are specific to each clinic’s resources and needs.88 Systematic reviews show that barriers occur at the clinic, clinician and patient levels.51,55,84,89,90 At the clinic level, common barriers are inadequate information technology infrastructure and integration into clinical workﬂow, insufficient time to review and act on PROMs responses and lack of payer/insurance reimbursement.51,89-91 Resources available to clinics for PROM implementation are highly variable88 and may include technology infrastructure, leadership in the clinic to champion the use of PROMs and access to palliative care clinicians. Common barriers for care teams are lack of
 
training on interpreting and using PROMs during discussions with patients, lack of perceived usefulness and liability concerns.51,55,89-91 Patients may have difficulty completing PROMs in the waiting room or remotely between visits (e.g. lack of technology access or experience, unavailable trans- lations, physical impairment) and may be unclear about the perceived usefulness if the care team does not review PROM responses with patients.51,89-91
To overcome these barriers, tailored implementation support is needed based on local resources, clinic culture and PROM characteristics (e.g. PROMs completed in the waiting room or remotely).85,88 Approaches from both implementation science88,92,93 and quality improvement73 have been successful when robust planning phases and a systematic approach were used. The planning stage can last several years but active implementation is typically shorter (weeks to months).93-95 Several RCTs conducting head-to- head comparisons of different PROM implementation stra- tegies in oncology clinics are in progress.96-98 Few examples of maintaining high-quality PROM use clinic-wide are available in the literature,95 but promising strategies are local champions with change facilitation skills (physicians, nurses or staff who provide leadership support for using PROMs in their clinic), audit and feedback (monthly feed- back to clinics on the percentage of their patients completing PROMs and whether symptom burden is improving) and ongoing outreach to clinics.73
In summary, the evidence for optimal PROM implementa- tion and support strategies is at a nascent stage, reﬂecting level III-V evidence. An international consortium has been funded to disseminate open access resources and expert recommendations for PROM implementation in health sys- temsd‘PROM Tools: Engaging Users and Stakeholders’ (PROTEUS-practice), available at https://theproteuscon sortium.org/.

Recommendations
PROM implementation should include engagement with clinic personnel, systematic training and ongoing moni- toring and oversight [III, A].
PROM implementation should include an initial assess- ment of barriers for both the clinic (e.g. whether the EMR vendor supports PROMs, availability of clinic re- sources for responding to alerts) and the patient level (preferred language(s), availability and comfort with internet access at home, literacy) and socio-cultural context [III, A].
PROM implementation support should be tailored based on clinic resources and culture, clinical needs and the pa- tient population and PROM characteristics (e.g. PROMs completed in the waiting room or remotely) [III, A].


USE OF PROMS AS A QUALITY METRIC
In addition to individual patient management, aggregated PROM data can be used for quality assessment and
 
Annals of Oncology	M. Di Maio et al.

 
improvement in clinical care.99-102 Data can be compared between organisations, clinics or providers, e.g. focusing on the proportion of patients with adequate pain control, nausea management or constipation during treatment.103 This can be followed by an improvement effort, e.g. using a ‘plan-do-check-act’ scheme or approaches of mutual learning.104
Like other quality metrics, to allow for fair clinician comparisons, PROMs may need to be adjusted by case mix or population risk.105,106 PROM use for quality improve- ment is endorsed by multiple initiatives as part of standard datasets,107 including large-scale voluntary or national cancer quality initiatives,108,109 and is well-established in fields outside oncology.110-112 Nevertheless, tangible evi- dence for the benefits of such approaches in oncology is still limited.

Recommendation
The use of aggregated PROM data should be considered to inform quality metrics for quality-of-care initiatives [V, B].


APPLICABILITY AND LIMITATIONS
There is substantial evidence supporting the benefits and feasibility of implementing PROMs in outpatient cancer clinical care, particularly for patients receiving active ther- apy or during observation of therapy with a high risk of recurrence. Evidence related to PROM monitoring during long-term survivorship, hospital admissions and during hospice or end-of-life care is emerging.
There is less evidence about strategies for optimising patient participation during the entirety of the cancer tra- jectory, adherence with PROM reporting (especially in older patients), integration of software into care processes and assignment of personnel roles; these areas warrant future research. Information on barriers and facilitators to PRO integration is largely based on research studies or pilots under strictly controlled conditions, rather than attempting to integrate PROs into routine clinical care.
A recent survey of oncology practitioners familiar with PROs from 41 countries identified a ‘lack of technological support’ and the ‘absence of a robust workﬂow to integrate PROs in clinical care’ as central barriers from a provider perspective.113 These findings echo results from earlier research and implementation guidelines that highlight time constraints, PROM interpretation and liability issues and lack of resources/funding as major barriers for PRO imple- mentation.55 Patient-level barriers when electronic PROMs are used include instrument complexity and relevance, de- gree of patient disability and patient technological savvy.55 As with other care enhancements, strong facilitators to adoption include funding and mandates.114 Establishing PROs in routine care means that a certain amount of money and resources are allocated. Payers and health authorities are, therefore, well positioned to enable uptake of PRO monitoring in routine cancer clinical care to improve clinical
 
outcomes, quality of care and patient experience. Convincing stakeholders and payers to invest in PROs re- quires the discussion of the robust evidence that PRO collection adds value. The current evidence, however, is largely limited to patient monitoring at the acute stage of the disease when the cancer is systemically treated and the use of PROs for the patienteprovider encounter to improve interaction, diagnosis and disease management. Evidence is less robust in other settings, such as when a patient is on oral cancer therapy, undergoing only RT, in follow-up care after surgery or no longer eligible for active treatment due to disease progression and/or worsening condition. Simi- larly, the evidence base for PROs as performance measures is rather slim, though acknowledged by several expert groups including this author group.
The authors recommend supporting  research in these
areas, particularly regarding the use of PROs in routine care as compared with the application in trials within dedicated projects and selected centres.

Recommendation
The allocation of funds for validated software reimburse- ment, dedicated resources (nurses, physicians, etc.) and systematic evaluation of PRO implementation pro- grammes in oncology clinics is recommended [V, A].

METHODOLOGY
This Clinical Practice Guideline was developed in accor- dance with the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) standard operating procedures for Clinical Practice Guideline development (http://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/ ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology). The relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Supplementary Table S3, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.04.007.115,116 State- ments without grading were considered justified standard clinical practice by the authors.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Manuscript editing support was provided by Louise Green and Ioanna Ntai (ESMO Guidelines staff).

FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by ESMO from central funds.

DISCLOSURE
MDM reports honoraria from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Takeda for consultancy or participation to advisory boards and direct research funding from Tesaro/ GlaxoSmithKline, institutional funding for work in clinical trials/contracted research from Beigene, Exelixis, MSD, Pfizer and Roche; EB reports institutional research funding
 
M. Di Maio et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
from the United States National Cancer Institute and Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), payments for activities as an Associate Editor for the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), and payments as a scientific advisor from the Research Triangle Institute, AstraZeneca, Carevive, Sivan, Navigating Cancer, Resilience and N-Power Medicine; FD has reported personal fees as an invited speaker from AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), Chugai, Ipsen, Merck and Takeda; personal fees for advisory board membership of Roche; institutional fees for advisory board membership received from Sivan, institu- tional receiver was Hyperion and advisory board member- ship stopped 14 April 2020; member of Board of Directors for Kelindi (institutional receiver, Hyperion); institution (Hyperion) has participations and stocks in Kelindi (non- oncological software editor) and in the National Institut of e-Health; he has also reported non-remunerated activities as a member of ASCO; LJF reports honoraria from Genomic Health, Novartis, Eli Lilly, prIME a Medscape Oncology Company, Pfizer, Sobi, MSD, 3P Solution, Veracyte, Voluntis and AstraZeneca for consultancy/participation on advisory boards. Also, grant funding from Veracyte, Eli Lilly, Roche and BMS; PAG reports honoraria from InformedDNA as member of Scientific Advisory Board, Oxford University Press as Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, royalties from Up-to-date as section editor on Cancer Survivorship, institutional funding for work in clinical trials/contracted research from Blue Note Thera- peutics, consultant for Grail and Blue Note Therapeutics and non-remunerated leadership roles for the Breast Cancer Research Foundation as member of Scientific Advisory Board; DH reports honoraria for consultancy and partici- pation on the scientific advisory board of Carevive Systems, institutional funding for work on clinical trials from Astra- Zeneca and contracted research funding from the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society of Canada, contractual payment from York University, ON, Canada for course development and teaching; CK is a full-time employee of the German Cancer Society, a non-profit. He reports non-remunerated leadership roles for the non-profits German Association of Medical Sociology (board of directors, treasurer) and the German Network on Health Services Research (section chair, oncology section); FP reports honoraria from Bayer, Pierre Fabre, AstraZeneca, Incyte, Ipsen, Clovis, Astellas, Sanofi, institutional funding for work in clinical trials/contracted research from Roche, Bayer, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Incyte, Tesaro/GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, non-remunerated leader- ship roles for Associazione Italiana di Oncologia Medica e AIOM (future President); AMS reports honoraria from the Association of Community Cancer Centers, Pfizer, Gen- entech, Purchaser Business Group on Health, and Henry Ford Cancer Center, a financially compensated leadership role in Navigating Cancer (consultant in 2021 for less than 5000 USD), institutional funding for work in clinical trials/ contracted research from Sivan Innovation and UroGen Pharma Ltd, and grant funding from PCORI, National In- stitutes of Health, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Bladder Cancer Advocacy Network, Hematology/
 
Oncology Pharmacy Association, Cancer and Aging Research Group; PS reports non-remunerated leadership roles with the Trans Tasman Radiation Oncology Group, Clinical Oncology Society of Australia and Head and Neck Cancer Australia; JFD reports honoraria from International Associ- ation for the Study of Lung Cancer (invited speaker), Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (PCORI project), Gen- entech (advisory board), Pfizer (advisory board); financial compensation from International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (independent consultant) and the United States government as a special employee and member of the Secretary’s Advisory Committee for Human Research Protections (SACHRP); non-remunerated activities for LUN- Gevity (Scientific Advisory Board), National Cancer Institute (scientific panels); non-remunerated leadership roles for The ROS1ders (Vice President, Board Chair); and non- remunerated membership or affiliation with the Interna- tional Association for the Study of Lung Cancer, American Society of Clinical Oncology, American Association for Can- cer Research, Nuvalent, AnHeart Therapeutics and Turning Point Therapeutics; CIR reports honoraria from Kyowa Kirin, Molteni Pharma Spa, Mundipharma and Angelini Pharma for educational events and invited speaker; LW, LZ, KA and DS have declared no potential conﬂicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	Di Maio M, Basch E, Bryce J, et al. Patient-reported outcomes in the evaluation of toxicity of anticancer treatments. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2016;13(5):319-325.
2.	Laugsand EA, Sprangers MAG, Bjordal K, et al. Health care providers underestimate symptom intensities of cancer patients: a multicenter European study. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2010;8:104.
3.	Basch E,  Iasonos A,  McDonough T, et al. Patient versus clinician symptom reporting using the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events: results of a questionnaire- based study. Lancet Oncol. 2006;7(11):903-909.
4.	Basch E. The missing voice of patients in drug-safety reporting. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(10):865-869.
5.	Marino D, Baratelli C, Guida G, et al. Impact of adoption of patient- reported outcomes in clinical practice on the accuracy of symptom reporting in medical records of cancer patients. Recenti Prog Med. 2020;111(12):740-748.
6.	Greimel ER, Bjelic-Radisic V, Pfisterer J, et al. Toxicity and quality of life outcomes in ovarian cancer patients participating in randomized controlled trials. Support Care Cancer. 2010;19(9):1421-1427.
7.	Strömgren AS, Groenvold M, Sorensen A, et al. Symptom recognition in advanced cancer. A comparison of nursing records against patient self-rating. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2001;45(9):1080-1085.
8.	Coombes RC, Bliss J, Hall E, et al. Under-reporting of symptoms in patients with early breast cancer who have received tamoxifen treatment for 2e3 years. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2003;22:48.
9.	Di Maio M, Gallo C, Leighl NB, et al. Symptomatic toxicities experi- enced during anticancer treatment: agreement between patient and physician reporting in three randomized trials. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(8):910-915.
10.	Fellowes D, Fallowfield LJ, Saunders CM, et al. Tolerability of hormone therapies for breast cancer: how informative are documented symptom profiles in medical notes for ‘well-tolerated’ treatments? Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2001;66(1):73-81.
11.	Dai Y, Cook OY, Yeganeh L, et al. Patient-reported barriers and facil- itators to seeking and accessing support in gynecologic and breast cancer survivors with sexual problems: a systematic review of quali- tative and quantitative studies. J Sex Med. 2020;17(7):1326-1358.
 
Annals of Oncology	M. Di Maio et al.

 
12.	Beaver C, Magnan M. Managing chemotherapy side effects: achieving reliable and equitable outcomes. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2016;20(6):589- 591.
13.	Coolbrandt A, Van den Heede K, Vanhove E, et al. Immediate versus delayed self-reporting of symptoms and side effects during chemo- therapy: does timing matter? Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2011;15(2):130-136.
14.	U.S. Department of Health Human Services F.D.A. Center for Drug Evaluation Research, U.S. Department of Health Human Services F.D.
A. Center for Biologics Evaluation Research, U.S. Department of Health Human Services F.D.A. Center for Devices Radiological Health. Guidance for industry: patient-reported outcome measures: use in medical product development to support labeling claims: draft guidance. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2006;4:79.
15.	Warrington L, Absolom K, Conner M, et al. Electronic systems for patients to report and manage side effects of cancer treatment: systematic review. J Med Internet Res. 2019;21(1):e10875.
16.	Yang LY, Manhas DS, Howard AF, et al. Patient-reported outcome use in oncology: a systematic review of the impact on patient-clinician communication. Support Care Cancer. 2017;26(1):41-60.
17.	Marandino L, Necchi A, Aglietta M, et al. COVID-19 emergency and the need to speed up the adoption of electronic patient-reported outcomes in cancer clinical practice. JCO Oncol Pract. 2020;16(6): 295-298.
18.	Basch E, Deal AM, Kris MG, et al. Symptom monitoring with patient- reported outcomes during routine cancer treatment: a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(6):557-565.
19.	Basch E, Deal AM, Dueck AC, et al. Overall survival results of a trial assessing patient-reported outcomes for symptom monitoring during routine cancer treatment. JAMA. 2017;318(2):197-198.
20.	Basch E, Schrag D, Jansen J, et al. Digital symptom monitoring with patient-reported outcomes in community oncology practices: A U.S. national cluster randomized trial. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(suppl 36): 349527.
21.	Barbera L, Sutradhar R, Seow H, et al. Impact of standardized Edmonton symptom assessment system use on emergency department visits and hospitalization: results of a population-based retrospective matched cohort analysis. JCO Oncol Pract. 2020;16(9):e958-e965.
22.	Barbera L, Sutradhar R, Seow H, et al. The impact of routine Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS) use on overall sur- vival in cancer patients: Results of a population-based retrospective matched cohort analysis. Cancer Med. 2020;9(19):7107-7115.
23.	Absolom K, Warrington L, Hudson E, et al. Phase III randomized controlled trial of eRAPID: eHealth intervention during chemo- therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(7):734-747.
24.	Kotronoulas G, Kearney N, Maguire R, et al. What is the value of the routine use of patient-reported outcome measures toward improvement of patient outcomes, processes of care, and health service outcomes in cancer care? A systematic review of controlled trials. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(14):1480-1501.
25.	Lizée T, Basch E, Trémolières P, et al. Cost-effectiveness of web-based patient-reported outcome surveillance in patients with lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2019;14(6):1012-1020.
26.	Nixon NA, Spackman E, Clement F, et al. Cost-effectiveness of symptom monitoring with patient-reported outcomes during routine cancer treatment. J Cancer Policy. 2018;15:32-36.
27.	Berry DL, Hong F, Halpenny B, et al. Electronic self-report assessment for cancer and self-care support: results of a multicenter randomized trial. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(3):199-205.
28.	Strasser F, Blum D, von Moos R, et al. The effect of real-time elec- tronic monitoring of patient-reported symptoms and clinical syn- dromes in outpatient workﬂow of medical oncologists: E-MO AIC, a multicenter cluster-randomized phase III study (SAKK 95/06). Ann Oncol. 2016;27(2):324-332.
29.	Mir O, Ferrua M, Fourcade A, et al. Intervention combining nurse navigators (NNs) and a mobile application versus standard of care (SOC) in cancer patients (pts) treated with oral anticancer agents (OAA): Results of CapRI, a single-center, randomized phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl 15):2000.
30.	 
Mooney K, Iacob E, Wilson CM, et al. Randomized trial of remote cancer symptom monitoring during COVID-19: impact on symptoms, QoL, and unplanned health care utilization. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(suppl 15):12000.
31.	Fabi A, Bhargava R, Fatigoni S, et al. Cancer-related fatigue: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis and treatment. Ann Oncol. 2020;31(6):713-723.
32.	New South Wales Cancer Institute. Determining optimal measures of health-related quality of life, anxiety and depression for evaluating progress in the psychosocial care of cancer patients in New South Wales, 2011. Available at https://sffpo.fr/wp-content/uploads/2011/ 10/determining-optimal-mesures-of-health-related-qol-anxiety-and- depression.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2022.
33.	Reeve BB, Mitchell SA, Dueck AC, et al. Recommended patient- reported core set of symptoms to measure in adult cancer treat- ment trials. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(7):dju129.
34.	Chung AE, Shoenbill K, Mitchell SA, et al. Patient free text reporting of symptomatic adverse events in cancer clinical research using the National Cancer Institute’s Patient-Reported Outcomes version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO-CTCAE). J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019;26(4):276-285.
35.	ePRO Consortium. Best Practices for Maximizing Electronic Data Capture Options during the Development of New Patient-Reported Outcome Instruments. Critical Path Institute (C-Path). 2014. Avail- able at https://c-path.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/BestPractic es_Maximizing_Data_Capture.pdf. Accessed February 5, 2022.
36.	Reeve BB, Wyrwich KW, Wu AW, et al. ISOQOL recommends minimum standards for patient-reported outcome measures used in patient- centered outcomes and comparative effectiveness research. Qual Life Res. 2013;22(8):1889-1905.
37.	Johnson C, Aaronson N, BlazebyJM, et al. EORTC Quality of life group: Guidelines for developing questionnaire modules. 4th ed. April 2011. Available at https://www.eortc.org/app/uploads/sites/2/2018/02/ guidelines_for_developing_questionnaire-_final.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2022.
38.	Wild D, Eremenco S, Mear I, et al. Multinational trialsdrecommendations on the translations required, approaches to using the same language in different countries, and the approaches to support pooling the data: the ISPOR patient-reported outcomes translation and linguistic validation good research practices task force report. Value Health. 2009;12(4):430- 440.
39.	Valderas JM, Ferrer M, Mendívil J, et al. Development of EMPRO: a tool for the standardized assessment of patient-reported outcome measures. Value Health. 2008;11(4):700-708.
40.	Wyrwich KW, Norquist JM, Lenderking WR, et al. Methods for inter- preting change over time in patient-reported outcome measures. Qual Life Res. 2012;22(3):475-483.
41.	Rothman M, Burke L, Erickson P, et al. Use of existing patient- reported outcome (PRO) instruments and their modification: The ISPOR good research practices for evaluating and documenting con- tent validity for the use of existing instruments and their modification PRO Task Force Report. Value Health. 2009;12(8):1075-1083.
42.	Muehlhausen W, Doll H, Quadri N, et al. Equivalence of electronic and paper administration of patient-reported outcome measures: a sys- tematic review and meta-analysis of studies conducted between 2007 and 2013. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2015;13:167.
43.	Baratelli C, Turco CGC, Lacidogna G, et al. The role of patient-reported outcomes in outpatients receiving active anti-cancer treatment: impact on patients’ quality of life. Support Care Cancer. 2019;27(12): 4697-4704.
44.	Stover A, Henson S, Jansen J, et al. Demographic and symptom dif- ferences in PRO-TECT trial (AFT-39) cancer patients electing to com- plete weekly home patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) via an automated phone call vs. email: implications for implementing PROs into routine care. Qual Life Res. 2019;28(suppl 1):S1.
45.	Calvert MJ, Cruz Rivera S, Retzer A, et al. Patient reported outcome assessment must be inclusive and equitable. Nat Med. 2022;28(6): 1120-1124.
 
M. Di Maio et al.	Annals of Oncology

 
46.	Basch E, Barbera L, Kerrigan CL, et al. Implementation of patient- reported outcomes in routine medical care. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2018;38:122-134.
47.	Aiyegbusi OL. Key methodological considerations for usability testing of electronic patient-reported outcome (ePRO) systems. Qual Life Res. 2020;29(2):325-333.
48.	Basch E, Stover AM, Schrag D, et al. Clinical utility and user percep- tions of a digital system for electronic patient-reported symptom monitoring during routine cancer care: findings from the pro-tect trial. JCO Clin Cancer Inform. 2020;4:947-957.
49.	Graupner C, Breukink SO, Mul S, et al. Patient-reported outcome measures in oncology: a qualitative study of the healthcare pro- fessional’s perspective. Support Care Cancer. 2021;29(9):5253- 5261.
50.	Nelson TA, Anderson B, Bian J, et al. Planning for patient-reported outcome implementation: Development of decision tools and prac- tical experience across four clinics. J Clin Transl Sci. 2020;4(6):498- 507.
51.	Foster A, Croot L, Brazier J, et al. The facilitators and barriers to implementing patient reported outcome measures in organisations delivering health related services: a systematic review of reviews. J Patient Rep Outcomes. 2018;2:46.
52.	Aaronson N, Elliot T, Greenhalgh J, et al. User’s Guide to Imple- menting Patient-Reported Outcomes Assessment in Clinical Practice, Version 2. January: International Society for Quality of Life Research, 2015. Available at https://www.isoqol.org/wp-content/uploads/ 2019/09/2015UsersGuide-Version2.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2022.
53.	Chan EKH, Edwards TC, Haywood K, et al. Implementing patient- reported outcome measures in clinical practice: a companion guide to the ISOQOL user’s guide. Qual Life Res. 2019;28(3):621-627.
54.	Snyder CF, Aaronson NK, Choucair AK, et al. Implementing patient-reported outcomes assessment in clinical practice: a re- view of the options and considerations. Qual Life Res. 2011;21(8):1305-1314.
55.	Howell D, Molloy S, Wilkinson K, et al. Patient-reported outcomes in routine cancer clinical practice: a scoping review of use, impact on health outcomes, and implementation factors. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(9):1846-1858.
56.	Lavallee DC, Chenok KE, Love RM, et al. Incorporating patient- reported outcomes into health care to engage patients and enhance care. Health Aff. 2016;35(4):575-582.
57.	Howell D, Mayer DK, Fielding R, et al. Management of cancer and health after the clinic visit: a call to action for self-management in cancer care. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2021;113(5):523-531.
58.	Hansen ST, Kjerholt M, Christensen SF, et al. Nurses’ experiences when introducing patient-reported outcome measures in an outpa- tient clinic. Cancer Nurs. 2020;44(2):E108-E120.
59.	Greenhalgh J, Dalkin S, Gooding K, et al. Functionality and feedback: a realist synthesis of the collation, interpretation and utilisation of patient-reported outcome measures data to improve patient care. Health Services and Delivery Research. 2017;5(2):1-280.
60.	Chan RJ, Teleni L, McDonald S, et al. Breast cancer nursing in- terventions and clinical effectiveness: a systematic review. BMJ Support Palliat Care. 2020;10(3):276-286.
61.	Charalambous A, Wells M, Campbell P, et al. A scoping review of trials of interventions led or delivered by cancer nurses. Int J Nurs Stud. 2018;86:36-43.
62.	Tuominen L, Stolt M, Meretoja R, et al. Effectiveness of nursing in- terventions among patients with cancer: an overview of systematic reviews. J Clin Nurs. 2019;28(13-14):2401-2419.
63.	Molassiotis A, Liu XL, Kwok SW. Impact of advanced nursing practice through nurse-led clinics in the care of cancer patients: a scoping review. Eur J Cancer Care. 2020;30(1):e13358.
64.	Kearney N, McCann L, Norrie J, et al. Evaluation of a mobile phone- based, advanced symptom management system (ASyMS©) in the management of chemotherapy-related toxicity. Support Care Cancer. 2008;17(4):437-444.
65.	Breen S, Aranda S, Ritchie D, et al. Improving the management of chemotherapy toxicities in haematological cancer patients: a phase II
 
randomised controlled trial of the Patient Remote Intervention and Symptom Management System (PRISMS). Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2012;8:312.
66.	Maguire R, McCann L, Kotronoulas G, et al. Real time remote symptom monitoring during chemotherapy for cancer: European multicentre randomised controlled trial (eSMART). BMJ. 2021;374: n1647.
67.	Mooney K, Whisenant MS, Beck SL. Symptom care at home: a comprehensive and pragmatic PRO system approach to improve cancer symptom care. Med Care. 2019;57 Suppl 5 Suppl 1 (suppl 5 1): S66-72.
68.	Mooney KH, Beck SL, Wong B, et al. Automated home monitoring and management of patient-reported symptoms during chemotherapy: results of the symptom care at home RCT. Cancer Med. 2017;6(3): 537-546.
69.	McLeod D, Esplen MJ, Wong J, et al. enhancing clinical practice in the management of distress: the therapeutic practices for distress man- agement (TPDM) project. Psycho-Oncol. 2018;27(9):2289-2295.
70.	Fitch M, Howell D, McLeod D, et al. Screening for distress: responding is a critical function for oncology nurses. Can Oncol Nurs J. 2011;22(1):12-30.
71.	Wilson CM, Mooney K. Advancing oncology nursing practice through the adoption of patient monitoring digital tools. Semin Oncol Nurs. 2020;36(6):151087.
72.	Howell D, Li M, Sutradhar R, et al. Integration of patient-reported outcomes (PROs) for personalized symptom management in “real- world” oncology practices: a population-based cohort comparison study of impact on healthcare utilization. Support Care Cancer. 2020;28(10):4933-4942.
73.	Howell D, Rosberger Z, Mayer C, et al. Personalized symptom man- agement: a quality improvement collaborative for implementation of patient reported outcomes (PROs) in ‘real-world’ oncology multisite practices. J Patient Rep Outcomes. 2020;4(1):47.
74.	Girgis A, Durcinoska I, Arnold A, et al. Web-based Patient-Reported Outcome Measures for Personalized Treatment and Care (PROMPT- Care): Multicenter pragmatic nonrandomized trial. J Med Internet Res. 2020;22(10):e19685.
75.	Kotronoulas G, Papadopoulou C, Simpson MF, et al. Using patient-reported outcome measures to deliver enhanced sup- portive care to people with lung cancer: feasibility and accept- ability of a nurse-led consultation model. Support Care Cancer. 2018;26(11):3729-3737.
76.	Kotronoulas G, Papadopoulou C, MacNicol L, et al. Feasibility and acceptability of the use of patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) in the delivery of nurse-led supportive care to people with colorectal cancer. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2017;29:115-124.
77.	Denis F, Lethrosne C, Pourel N, et al. Randomized trial comparing a web-mediated follow-up with routine surveillance in lung cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2017;109(9).
78.	Denis F, Basch E, Septans A-L, et al. Two-year survival comparing web- based symptom monitoring vs routine surveillance following treat- ment for lung cancer. JAMA. 2019;321(3):306-307.
79.	Crawford GB, Dzierz_anowski T, Hauser K, et al. Care of the adult cancer patient at the end of life: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines. ESMO Open. 2021;6(4):100225.
80.	Bakitas M, Lyons KD, Hegel MT, et al. Effects of a palliative care intervention on clinical outcomes in patients with advanced cancer: the Project ENABLE II randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2009;302(7): 741-749.
81.	McCall K, Keen J, Farrer K, et al. Perceptions of the use of a remote monitoring system in patients receiving palliative care at home. Int J Palliat Nurs. 2008;14(9):426-431.
82.	Gordon B-BE, Chen RC. Patient-reported outcomes in cancer survi- vorship. Acta Oncol. 2017;56(2):166-173.
83.	Ramsey I, Corsini N, Hutchinson AD, et al. A core set of patient- reported outcomes for population-based cancer survivorship research: a consensus study. J Cancer Surviv. 2021;15(2):201-212.
84.	Aiyegbusi OL, Nair D, Peipert JD, et al. A narrative review of current evidence supporting the implementation of electronic
 
Annals of Oncology	M. Di Maio et al.

 
patient-reported outcome measures in the management of chronic diseases. Ther Adv Chronic Dis. 2021;12:20406223211015958.
85.	Sisodia RC, Dankers C, Orav J, et al. Factors associated with increased collection of patient-reported outcomes within a large health care system. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(4):e202764.
86.	Hsiao C-J, Dymek C, Kim B, et al. Advancing the use of patient- reported outcomes in practice: understanding challenges, opportu- nities, and the potential of health information technology. Qual Life Res. 2019;28(6):1575-1583.
87.	Geerligs L, Shepherd HL, Butow P, et al. What factors inﬂuence organisational readiness for change? Implementation of the Austra- lian clinical pathway for the screening, assessment and management of anxiety and depression in adult cancer patients (ADAPT CP). Support Care Cancer. 2020;29(6):3235-3244.
88.	Stover AM, Haverman L, van Oers HA, et al. Using an implementation science approach to implement and evaluate patient-reported outcome measures (PROM) initiatives in routine care settings. Qual Life Res. 2021;30(11):3015-3033.
89.	Nguyen H, Butow P, Dhillon H, et al. A review of the barriers to using Patient-Reported Outcomes (PROs) and Patient-Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs) in routine cancer care. J Med Radiat Sci. 2021;68(2):186-195.
90.	Antunes B, Harding R, Higginson IJ. Implementing patient- reported outcome measures in palliative care clinical practice: a systematic review of facilitators and barriers. Palliat Med. 2013;28(2):158-175.
91.	Calvert M, Kyte D, Price G, et al. Maximising the impact of patient reported outcome assessment for patients and society. BMJ. 2019;364:k5267.
92.	Howell D, Powis M, Kirkby R, et al. Improving the quality of self- management support in ambulatory cancer care: a mixed-method study of organisational and clinician readiness, barriers and en- ablers for tailoring of implementation strategies to multisites. BMJ Qual Saf. 2021;31(1):12-22.
93.	Bachmann JM, Posch DR, Hickson GB, et al. Developing an imple- mentation strategy for systematic measurement of patient-reported outcomes at an academic health center. J Healthc Manag. 2020;65(1):15-28.
94.	Wintner LM, Sztankay M, Riedl D, et al. How to implement routine electronic patient-reported outcome monitoring in oncology reha- bilitation. Int J Clin Pract. 2021;75(4):e13694.
95.	Barbera L, Lee F, Sutradhar R. Use of patient-reported outcomes in regional cancer centres over time: a retrospective study. CMAJ Open. 2019;7(1):E101-E108.
96.	Roberts NA, Mudge A, Alexander K, et al. The iPROMOS protocol: a stepped-wedge study to implement routine patient-reported out- comes in a medical oncology outpatient setting. BMJ Open. 2019;9(2):e027046.
97.	Butow P, Shaw J, Shepherd HL, et al. Comparison of implementation strategies to inﬂuence adherence to the clinical pathway for screening, assessment and management of anxiety and depression in adult cancer patients (ADAPT CP): study protocol of a cluster rand- omised controlled trial. BMC Cancer. 2018;18(1):1077.
98.	National Cancer Institute - Healthcare Delivery Research Program. Improving the Management of symptoms during and following cancer treatment (IMPACT). 2021. Available at https:// healthcaredelivery.cancer.gov/impact/. Accessed April 29, 2022.
99.	 
Basch E, Torda P, Adams K. Standards for patient-reported outcomeebased performance measures. JAMA. 2013;310(2):139.
100.	Cella D, Hahn EA, Jensen SE, et al. Patient-Reported Outcomes in Per- formance Measurement. Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI Press, 2015.
101.	Basch E, Spertus J, Adams Dudley R, et al. Methods for developing Patient-Reported Outcome-Based Performance Measures (PRO-PMs). Value Health. 2015;18(4):493-504.
102.	Stover AM, Urick BY, Deal AM, et al. Performance measures based on how adults with cancer feel and function: stakeholder recommen- dations and feasibility testing in six cancer centers. JCO Oncol Pract. 2020;16(3):e234-e250.
103.	Sampurno F, Cally J, Opie JL, et al. Establishing a global quality of care benchmark report. Health Informatics J. 2021;27(2):1460458 22110157.
104.	Bradley EH, Curry LA, Ramanadhan S, et al. Research in action: using positive deviance to improve quality of health care. Implement Sci. 2009;4:25.
105.	Iezzoni LI. Risk Adjustment for Measuring Health Care Outcomes. 4th ed. Chicago: Health Administration Press, 2012.
106.	Sibert NT, Pfaff H, Breidenbach C, et al. Different approaches for case-mix adjustment of patient-reported outcomes to compare healthcare providers-methodological results of a systematic re- view. Cancers (Basel). 2021;13(16):3964.
107.	ICHOM - International Consortium for Health Outcomes Measure- ment. Localized Prostate Cancer Data Collection Reference Guide. 2017.	Available	at	https://ichom.org/files/medical-conditions/ localized-prostate-cancer/localized-prostate-cancer-reference-guide. pdf. Accessed April 29, 2022.
108.	Evans SM, Millar JL, Moore CM, et al. Cohort profile: the TrueNTH Global Registry - an international registry to monitor and improve localised prostate cancer health outcomes. BMJ Open. 2017;7(11): e017006.
109.	Aggarwal A, Nossiter J, Parry M, et al. Public reporting of outcomes in radiation oncology: the national prostate cancer audit. Lancet Oncol. 2021;22(5):e207-e215.
110.	Deutscher D, Werneke MW, Hayes D, et al. Impact of risk adjustment on provider ranking for patients with low back pain receiving physical therapy. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2018;48(8):637-648.
111.	Waljee JF, Ghaferi A, Finks JF, et al. Variation in patient-reported outcomes across hospitals following surgery. Med Care. 2015;53(11):960-966.
112.	Khor S, Lavallee DC, Cizik AM, et al. Hospital and surgeon variation in patient-reported functional outcomes after lumbar spine fusion. Spine. 2020;45(7):465-472.
113.	Cheung YT, Chan A, Charalambous A, et al. The use of patient- reported outcomes in routine cancer care: preliminary insights from a multinational scoping survey of oncology practitioners. Support Care Cancer. 2022;30(2):1427-1439.
114.	Kowalski C, Roth R, Carl G, et al. A multicenter paper-based and web- based system for collecting patient-reported outcome measures in patients undergoing local treatment for prostate cancer: first expe- riences. J Patient Rep Outcomes. 2020;4(1):56.
115.	Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144.
116.	Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18(3):421.
